3.

1 French

See below the first tracks of Intro to French—the latestcourse to be recorded—with commentary in italic print. In thiscourse, we begin with Track 1, as Introduction to French skips theintroductory track that other courses have and experiments withincluding an abridged version of the starting instructions in order toget going sooner, to then continue weaving those omittedinstructions throughout the first lessons.

Track 1

00:00 Teacher: Okay, so usually we, we have an introduction trackexplaining the method and the project, but I suspected we might belosing quite a few learners this way, so we can just jump right intolearning French. I do need to tell you a little bit about how we’regoing to learn, though, and that’s just basically that you need torelax and simply follow this conversation that we’re having like youwould with a friend, just that now that friend is me, and when I askyou something, you will think it out and reply, as you would in anyother conversation.

Of course, this is probably quite different to ‘any other conversation’;the point is to not enter into the ‘learner frame of mind’ or in otherwords ‘memorisation mode’. The key point here is to tell the studentto relax but to follow, without putting too much emphasis onrelaxing, which in my experience can cause the opposite effect!

00:33 Teacher: I’ll be speaking to a real student... Hello.123

/ Student: Hello.

Teacher: ...who is here with me, and you should get in the habit ofreplying when he does, and any other advice that you might need tofollow the course will be given as we go along.

The pause button should be mentioned shortly, at a moment thatmight make it seem more relevant than right at the beginning of thecourse before we have solicited any target sentences. In the sameway, this opening avoids giving all of those other rules about how toengage with the course before they can be internalised in context.In other words, we are now applying the same philosophy toteaching the rules of engagement as we have been applying tolinguistic material in LT courses. Previous intro tracks are a greatexample of something that we might do wrong for a very long timesimply because we hadn’t really stopped to think about it, becausewe reproduced habits before engaging critical thought! In hindsight,it made little sense to pile so many rules of engagement on to ourlearners in the first track.

00:47 Teacher: I wanted to begin by speaking about how in Englishwe already use a lot of French, in English. English as a language, iskind of half Germanic and half Latin. Somewhere there in themiddle, you know, a lot of the time we have two words to say thesame thing, and one sounds formal, and the other one soundsinformal, and, you know, one is, the formal one is Latin and theinformal one is Germanic. You know, you could have, for example,to ask, which is very Germanic, and then to enquire, you know,which is very Latin. That Latin word is often going to sound like aFrench word.

124

/ Above, we let our learner in on what we are doing right from thestart: we will probably source some French from English if we openby talking about how English is full of French! Thus, the learner canrelax and understand the additional information given, rather thantrying to memorise any of it. The teacher’s ‘calm and curious’intonation and phrasing is part of what helps cue this. This allcontributes to establishing how the learner should be engaging.The teacher’s particularly colourful intonation when saying ‘enquire’helps highlight the word’s register in English, and can be picked upon even by those whose level of English would otherwise not makethe contrast in register between ‘ask’ and ‘enquire’ obvious.The explanation in general terms helps establish an importantthought process from the outset, and this thought process isimportant for our learner to take advantage of all the vocabularyconversion rules that we will see. An English speaker is likely tothink of ‘ask’ before ‘enquire’, of ‘find’ before ‘encounter’, and solooking for the (often more obscure) Latin word will be necessary torealise all of the meanings that can be accessed by the learner.

01:24 Teacher: So we already speak or use a lot of French in ourEnglish even though we may not realise it. For example, the wordfor cake in French is gâteau.

Student: Gâteau.

Teacher: Gâteau. And of course we have this in English, no? But inEnglish ‘gateau’ describes a type of cake. In French it’s just aneveryday word for cake. Gâteau. Or the cake, le, le gâteau.

The fact that ‘gâteau’ is the everyday word for cake in French iswhat makes it a word acceptable to import directly into French from

125

/ English. If it just meant ‘gateau’ (in the English sense) in French, itwould be a very weak place to start a course! The fact that itdoesn’t, means we are learning that when a word’s form moves intoanother language, its exact meaning might not.We learn the word for ‘the’ by the by, without mentioning that this isthe masculine ‘the’; that’s not relevant yet (although we are buildingup to that) and without a feminine noun to contrast it with,mentioning the masculinity of ‘le’ would represent mental debris.This is an example of when a writer may need to repress the urge toget too much information off of their chest at once!

01:47 Student: Le gâteau.

Whilst all courses are based on sound more than spelling, theFrench course really does make great use of this feature in order tocircumvent many problems we’d otherwise have in the language,such as with verb forms which often change form (spelling) withoutchanging their sound. Although the spelling of ‘gâteau’ is complex(especially if we are conscious of what we want to teach ourlearners about French vowels), the pronunciation isn’t. We don’tmention the spelling because we don’t want to form any rulesaround it yet.

01:48 Teacher: Le gâteau. Or we have the word coffee in English,which is café in French. Café, meaning both coffee or a coffee shopyou know, like where you go to drink coffee.

Student: Café.

Teacher: So if le gâteau is the cake, le gâteau, how might you saythe coffee?126

/ Here we are giving the most important introduction thus far into ourgeneral learning process; this is the first time we have solicited thatour student apply information to a new context. Also for this reason,it is beneficial that we have not yet mentioned the feminine ‘the’, sothat it doesn’t interfere with this process.

02:10 Student: Le café.

Teacher: Le café. Very good. So for the students listening to therecording, you would have had a second or two pause there torespond like the student here with me and say le café. But youshould get in the habit of pausing, even though you might not needto yet, you should get in the habit of pausing, thinking out slowly andcalmly your response, saying it out loud and then continuing to seewhat the student here with me has said, and in this way participatein the class.

Previously, we have only said ‘answer when the student does’ whichhas allowed us to not be too distracted by the rules of engagementwhilst we are hearing about French. Waiting until now to mentionthe pause button means we are applying the same rules to ourgeneral instructions as we are to our linguistic content; we give theinformation when it is relevant. This in turn will help the learner pickup on details like ‘pause even when you feel you don’t need to’,which is very important advice. It also makes the information moreinteresting that we break the ‘fourth wall’ here, addressing theremote student directly which in other courses only happens duringthe introduction track (we might refer to remote learners, but rarelyor never find ourselves addressing them directly). This helps makethis very important information about pausing more memorable,where it is evident that including it only in an intro track can make it

127

/ quite forgettable. A critique though; I should have said ‘pause theaudio’ to be clearer, I wonder how many students would have takenthe idea of pausing to simply mean ‘stopping to think’, withoutregard to how they can pause the audio.

02:41 Teacher: I want in French, I want, is je veux.

Student: Je veux.

Teacher: Je veux. So we have I, je, and then veux, for want. Andthis veux is actually connected to the word ‘volunteer’. A volunteeris the one who wants to do, they are doing something just out ofwanting. So we get je veux in French. I want.

We get to repeat the new material numerous times above, butwithout the sensation of repeating (masked repetition). Dividing up‘je veux’ in two, as well as the etymological comment, both helpmask this repetition of the phrase.It is often mentioned in courses that finding the first sound of a wordwill help the rest of it roll off the tongue. This is what ‘volunteer’ aimsto achieve in this context, as well as introducing for the first time thedeeper analysis we’ll habitually engage in regarding language originand language generally, and how our learner should engage withsuch information (i.e. enjoy it, rather than memorise it).Of course, ‘veux’ is also a preliminary step to creating sentenceswith the infinitive verbs we’ll soon source from our Latin-English, butas we have begun with nouns, we can also do some important workwith ‘veux’ before we get to verb infinitives.Course writers might get confused about what category sounds like‘je’ fall into. Are they sounds that need special attention or ones thatcan arise casually? The confusion here would originate from the

128

/ spelling, but the fact is that even though it is not spelt with a J inEnglish, this sound does exist as in ‘pleasure’, ‘measure’, etc.

03:07 Student: Je veux.

Teacher: So je is I, and that’s spelt JE, and then we have veux forwant, and je and veux are actually two different vowel sounds, twoslightly different vowel sounds. Although they may sound the samewhen people speak fast, but we have one sound in je and anothervowel sound in veux.

We don’t give any instruction on how to reproduce these differentvowel sounds; to start talking about the mouth and what shape itshould be in would be a surefire way to overwhelm and disengage agreat number of learners, and so soon, too! The precise productionof these vowels is beside the point (cued by mentioning that theymight sound the same in rapid speech). Rather we are using thisfocus to mask further repetition of ‘je veux’, whilst also cueing thatwe’ll need to pay close attention to vowels in French generally. All ofthis helps us remember ‘je veux’ without trying to.It is also notable in the above explanation how we spell out ‘je’ butnot ‘veux’. Just because we have spelt the one, does not mean thatwe are under any obligation to spell out the other. We don’t want totalk about the X on ‘veux’ just yet!

03:28 Teacher: So give me again I want?

Student: Je veux.

Teacher: Je veux.

Student: Je veux.129

/ Teacher: Very good. I want the cake?

We don’t pre-solicit ‘the cake’ first in order to take advantage of theelement of surprise, which the memorable ‘gâteau’ allows us to do.The learner will likely be surprised that they can make this firstsentence, and that in turn should be motivating. If the learnerfreezes up, we get to show them that by thinking first of ‘I want’ andthen about ‘the cake’, the target sentence suddenly becomessimple.

Student: Je veux le gâteau.

Teacher: Good. And le is spelt LE, just like je which is spelt JE, andthat’s the same vowel sound there. Le, je. So give it another try.

The student pronounces the E as in ‘letter’, and we correct by lettingthem know that they should be pronouncing ‘le’ how they have beenpronouncing ‘je’, because they share similar spellings. But we don’tdo it in that order! Read the explanation again and note the order inwhich the elements of it come. Beginning with the spelling as if itwere extra information helps mask the correction, which makes thecorrection in itself more memorable when it eventually comes.Pairing words up in this way based on their pronunciation andspelling will be a very useful tool in managing the complicatedpanorama of vowels in French, and was going to get mentioned inany case. Of course, such improvised corrections that tie into thecourse structure can come right off the bat if we are sure of wherewe are headed in our course. Mentioning the similarity in spellingbetween ‘je’ and ‘le’ has simply come a little earlier here in order totake advantage of our learner’s error.

03:52 Student: Je veux le gâteau.130

/ Teacher: Very good. Je veux le gâteau. I want the coffee?

Student: Je veux le café.

Teacher: Je veux le café.

Note how the teacher’s intonation and phrasing calls back to theprevious correction, making a slight emphasis on how ‘je’ and ‘le’sound similar. It’s a subtle thing, but is part of what enables us tosmoothly keep our recording student up to speed.

Teacher: If you want to say it, like I want it, well the word for it is thesame as the word for the, which was?

‘It’ being the word for ‘the’ is a general truth in French. Associating‘it’ and ‘the’ (and thus the noun ‘the’ refers to) right from the outsetworks towards preventing a worry I had for Complete Spanish; thatthe use of ‘lo’ as ‘general ‘it’’ (i.e. without reference to a specificnoun) becomes prematurely fossilised as a general way ofrepresenting ‘it’, even when ‘it’ does refer to a noun. In such a case,learners will less often retrieve ‘la’ (to refer to feminine nouns),instead going automatically to the masculine. For this reason, webegin associating ‘the’ and ‘it’ from our first use of ‘it’ in Introductionto French.

Student: Le.

04:14 Teacher: Le. But we have it first. We say I it want. We put itbefore want in French. So if we want to say I want it, in French wesay I it want. How would that be?

131

/ We have said the same thing in three different ways above. Wehave said that ‘it’ comes first, that it comes before ‘want’, and wehave given a direct translation. This has also allowed us to saynothing! We have avoided giving any rule about the position of ‘le’for now. The fact that ‘le’ is placed ‘before want’ is not a rule assuch, only an instruction. ‘Before the verb’ on the other hand is arule, but we haven’t clarified what a ‘verb’ is yet and now is not anespecially fitting time to do that. For now, we can content ourselveswith showing our learner how word order can differ betweenlanguages, whilst making preliminary steps towards a concrete rule.

04:28 Student: Le, eh… so, je le veux.

Teacher: Je le veux. Very good. I want it. Je le veux. You want is tuveux. Tu veux.

Student: Tu veux.

Teacher: Now, depending on the accent in French and alsodepending on your ear, you might hear something like a CH to yourear here.

This is another way of saying that it sounds kind of like a CH, butnot exactly. We get to say this by including the information that todifferent ears sounds might ‘sound’ (or be visualised) differently.This is true, and is easily demonstrable by asking a Greek vs. anEnglish speaker to decide on what is a K and a G, or between a Pand a B!

04:53 Teacher: It might sound like /chu/ a little bit. Or maybe like a/tsiu/, with a little bit of an S in Canada for example. And the /u/sound here might be a bit unfamiliar for English speakers. Tu.132

/ The additional information about variations of ‘tu’ is not onlyimportant in itself but helps us disguise the most importantcomment, which is about the quality of the U. If we had discussedthe U in a more prominent manner, it would be more likely to makelearners tense up their mouths and produce a more unfavourablesound. Nestling the U among other considerations about soundhelps our learner imitate the U in a more relaxed manner, which willincrease success.Giving various ways ‘tu’ might sound in different dialects also helpsus hang around on the U sound and mask that repetition. If wedidn’t mask that repetition we would be inadvertently cueing to ourlearners that this is a very difficult sound, and thus we’d add to theirtension. With all of this effort to reduce tension, we can still directour learner’s focus, as we do when we comment that the soundmight be unfamiliar to an English speaker.

Student: Tu.

Teacher: We point our lips out there when we make that /u/.

We generally keep physical instruction in regard to pronunciationminimal and save it for the tips that really do have the potential toresolve learners’ problems. Having to point out one’s lips issomething that an English speaker would unlikely do naturally here,and might even feel ‘silly’ doing, without (or even with!) theinstruction.

05:11 Teacher: So you want is tu veux.

We give rather than solicit ‘you want’ because, even though thelearner would most likely come up with this themselves and it would133

/ be beneficial to task them with recalling ‘veux’, we don’t want tosuggest that this kind of behaviour is generally valid for a verb;verbs can change form for different subjects in French.

Student: Tu veux.

Teacher: How would you say you want the cake?

The teacher’s intonation on the target sentence is slightly playfulhere. This subtly recognises that the sentence is maybe not acommon or especially useful one, which has the effect of inhibitingthe learner from noticing that of their own accord. We won’t alwaysdo this, but it is something we may find ourselves doing more oftenat the beginning of a course; the learner will soon understand thatthe sentences we produce are much less important than the ruleswe use to produce them.

Student: Tu veux le gâteau.

Teacher: Very good. Tu veux le gâteau. And you can make that intoa question in French just by making it sound like a question. So wejust can make a question tone with our voice, no, to get thequestion. Do you want the cake? How would that be?

French questions can get much more complicated than this, andwe’ll get around to that. For now we take advantage of the questionform that doesn’t change structure in order to continue practicingwhat we have learnt. This is yet another example of maskedrepetition, as is the way we rephrase comments about theinterrogative intonation above.

05:37 Student: Tu veux… tu veux le gâteau?134

/ Teacher: Tu veux le gâteau? How would you say you want it?

The above represents a little artificial friction at this early stage inthe course because we don’t divide the thought process up for ourlearner or recap on what we had seen a minute ago, rather weleave them to remember how to find ‘it’, and where to put it. Thishelps communicate to our learner that they will not be able to do thiscourse on autopilot, and such moments of artificial friction (wherewe make things more complicated than they could be) help jolt ourlearner out of any automatism, forcing them to think a little harder.We want our learners to get used to the idea of how at somemoments they will have to employ more thought than at others, andit is best to get them used to this early!

05:46 Student: Tu le veux.

Now would have been a good time to positively reinforce putting ‘le’before ‘veux’ in order to indirectly correct any remote learner whoerred, and also to reinforce the idea in itself.

Teacher: Tu le veux. Very good. Do you want it?

The interrogative sentence enables any remote learner that didn’tget the last sentence correct, to try building it again now.

Student: Tu le veux?

Teacher: Very good. Just with your voice, no? Tu le veux?

The statement ‘just with your voice’ creates a moment of engaginguncertainty before the exaggerated intonation on the teacher’sFrench sentence makes it clear that we are referring to intonation.135

/ 05:58 Student: Tu le veux?

Teacher: Very good. So we’ve seen, we can pull some words intoFrench, or back into French, from Latin English. Words like gâteau,café, and also relate words that might seem unrelated but in factare related, like veux for want and 'volunteer', the one who wants.

Whilst the above puts the cognates we have seen thus far into twomain groups: obviously related words, and less obviously relatedwords, what it really does is make one ‘group’ in order to contrastwith the information that is coming about conversion rules. So farwe have imported loose words, and now we will do something thatmakes those loose cognates quite inconsequential. In this way, wecan appreciate how the above description is simply easing us intonew material, and raising our learner’s attention in preparation for it.

06:17 Teacher: We can also learn some tricks to convert hugegroups of words into French from our Latin English, or our FrenchEnglish. Now, whenever we have an -ION word in English, likeinvitation, opinion, participation, we can identify this word as comingfrom Latin by its -ION ending. Which means it is probably the samein French, as most of Latin English came to English through French.

This information will eventually be used to source verb infinitivesand connect them with verbs like ‘want’, but there is no rush to getthere and we’ll weave this aim in with the convenient contrast wecan make between the -ION nouns which are feminine, and themasculine ones we have already learnt.

06:44 Teacher: So for example collection in French is collection.Collection.136

/ Student: Collection.

Teacher: Now, it’s spelt the same, but we notice an S sound insteadof the /sh/ that we have in English. Collection, and in Frenchcollection, like with an S. And we also notice that the N is barelyheard, barely pronounced or not heard. But it’s not exactly silent.We don’t ignore it totally, we do think about that N. We kind of finishthere. Collection, no? Which affects the sounds before but we don’treally hear the N, so collection.

The situation of a vowel plus N/M ending a syllable and nasalising itis quite prolific in French so it’s great to start chipping away at thatearly with the most tangible example of it, which is with the O. Weavoid talking about ‘nasal’ sounds for now, instead we canapproximate our learners to this sound by getting them to ‘thinkabout’ the N or ‘finish there’, but not pronounce it. This action ofpulling the N back in brings us closer to the nasalisation. We willelaborate on this over time, and this simplified explanation is gearedmore at getting the learner to reproduce the new words from this setwithout being overloaded with phonetic considerations such that theconversion rule loses our focus.

07:19 Student: Collection.

Teacher: We like, we’re going towards the N but we don’t, we don’tget there. But it’s not silent as is often said.

This repetition, whilst contradicting overtly what is ‘often said’ aboutFrench, is separated from the previous explanation as to give it itsown stage to stand on! It is an important cue to our learner that wewill find our own ways of describing language which will often137

/ contrast to those we hear around. We also repeat the importantadvice of moving towards an N in the pronunciation, and with thisrepetition we help to counter that common oversimplification thatthis N is silent.

07:27 Teacher: How might you say organisation?

Turns of phrase such as ‘how might you say’, help cue to our learnerthat they don’t know this word, but they can find it. This helps nudgeour learner back to the vocabulary conversion rule following oursecondary focus on the semi-silent N which appeared within theframework of that rule.

Student: Organisation.

Our learner’s pronunciation is less than perfect (he pronounces toostrong an N) but it is preferable to correct by feeding back bettermodel pronunciation at this stage, rather than stopping to reiterateabout the N again. If we are too repetitive about the N, we riskshifting our focus away from the main theme.

Teacher: That’s it. Organisation. Tradition?

Student: Tradition.

Teacher: Tradition. Attraction?

Student: Attraction.

Of course, the above words are similar in form which is why we canaccess them with our rule, but they don’t have to be similar inmeaning! Making an effort to choose words which draw from wildly138

/ different semantic areas (such as ‘attraction’ and ‘tradition’), helpsour learner appreciate the usefulness of this conversion rule. Such aselection might of course also occur by accident, but so mightincluding semantically similar words which do not communicate thesemantic breadth of the words pertaining to this rule, and so it issomething to bear in mind.

Teacher: Attraction. What was the cake again?

Student: Le gâteau.

Teacher: Le gâteau. The coffee?

Student: Le café.

Whilst it might appear that we are recalling these nouns, what weare actually recalling is the definite article.The learner has mispronounced the article in both ‘the cake’ and‘the coffee’. First we tried correcting indirectly by relaying back abetter pronunciation, and on the second occasion we correct overtlyand connect that to our scheduled recap of ‘le’ in order to move onto ‘la’:

07:53 Teacher: Le café. So, much more like /lə/ than /le/. Le café.So we saw how the word for the was le, no? Le café. Le gâteau.And also that we can use this le for it. But the collection is la, lacollection.

As mentioned above, I have taken measures in Introduction toFrench to ensure that there is no negative language transfer fromthe English ‘it’ enforced by our course design. For this reason, wemention again how we also use ‘le’ for ‘it’, and then open a tension

139

/ contour to resolve when we say, ‘but ‘the collection’ is ‘la’, ‘lacollection’’. ‘But’ (along with intonation) hints at an elaboration that isin order, and this tension contour will be resolved when weunderstand why we are using ‘la’ with these nouns, and what thatmeans for ‘it’.

08:11 Student: La collection.

Teacher: The tradition is la tradition.

We give another ‘la’ noun without any explanation as to why thisnoun also takes ‘la’. We are showing that ‘la collection’ is not anisolated case, and are either leading our learner to notice that it isbecause these are -ION words, or to wonder why these nouns take‘la’, so that we can now resolve that tension.

Student: La tra… la tradition.

08:18 Teacher: This is because French nouns, nouns are words wecan put the in front of, are considered either masculine or feminine.

Here we can define a noun effectively and meaningfully in half abreath as something we put ‘the’ in front of, facilitated by how it iswoven into an explanation about the very words for ‘the’!I like to use turns of phrase such as ‘are considered’ rather than‘are’ in such circumstances because for many learners the wholeconcept of noun gender is very strange indeed. ‘Are considered’almost silently agrees with those learners, which means they areless likely to be jolted by the idea of gender.

140

/ 08:26 Teacher: The word itself, rather than the object it refers to,has a gender.

This is an important point which is mentioned in all applicable LTcourses; that it is the word and not the object that has gender. Thephilosophical truth is maybe somewhere between the two, but thelinguistic truth is that the noun itself has gender, rather than thething it names. This helps us focus on the nouns we manipulaterather than what they refer to. It also helps learners get over themost common rejection they might feel towards the concept ofgrammatical gender; trying to understand how a chair can be maleor female! It is not the chair, it is the word, and as we will see, thereare very clear guidelines that make identifying a noun’s gender at afirst glance about as easy as identifying a human’s.

08:30 Teacher: The masculine nouns go with le, LE, and thefeminine nouns go with la, LA. What was I want?

Stopping to spell the articles helps us differentiate and encodethem.

Student: Je veux.

Teacher: I want the collection?

Student: Je veux la collection.

Teacher: Je veux la collection. You want?

Structurally, we are moving towards using ‘la’ as feminine ‘it’, but aswriters we shouldn’t be so singularly focused on that that we forgetto tie in previous material, whilst also expanding our vocabulary rule141

/ along the way. Below we recap ‘tu’, the interrogation, and giveanother -ION word:

Student: Tu veux.

Teacher: Very good. Tu veux. Do you want?

Student: Tu veux?

Teacher: Tu veux? The confirmation is la confirmation. Laconfirmation.

We are yet to specify that -ION words are feminine (we have onlysaid that nouns can be feminine) so we continue to give thesenouns with their articles.

Student: La confirmation.

Teacher: So again, we have a la word, no? We have a feminineword. And we notice that apart from the N on the end, we also don’treally hear the N of con-. Confirmation. We don’t ignore it, we stillthink about it. But we don’t really hear it. La confirmation.

Here we are tempting our learner with resolution! It’s almost like weare about to confirm for them what they probably have worked outfor themselves (that -ION words are feminine) but instead we makefurther elaboration on pronunciation!With this choice of noun (with ‘con’) and elaboration about that N,we are building slowly up to the idea, or rule, of an N or M at theend of a syllable being nasalised. First we saw the N nasalised onthe -ION ending, and now we revisit the same sound in ‘con’. In thisway, we will later have ample examples to define what exactly is142

/ happening, rather than struggling to do so too soon; for now we justdescribe the sound again without losing our main focus.

09:23 Student: La confirmation.

Teacher: Do you want the confirmation?

Student: Tu veux la confirmation?

Teacher: Tu veux la confirmation? So we said that the word for itis the same as the word for the. So if you want to say I want it, andyou mean the confirmation, la confirmation, how would you say Iwant it? I it want in French?

We have just resolved that ‘but’ which occurred in the explanation at07:53! The word for ‘the’ is the same as the word for ‘it’, the rule hasnot changed, and this will mean that ‘it’ is a different word here. Weare working to establish early on the habit of checking what nounwe are referring to before employing ‘it’. Doing this before visitingthe general (or ‘neuter’) ‘it’, which is also ‘le’, helps us avoid thepremature fossilisation of ‘le’ for ‘it’ in all circumstances.The direct translation on the end helps counter confusion in wordorder that might occur due to our learner being overly focused onreproducing ‘la’ (which has just occurred in a different word positionin the previous target sentence).

09:49 Student: Je la veux.

Teacher: Je la veux. Very good.

We now recap this new feminine ‘it’ with ‘tu’.

143

/ 09:52 Teacher: You want the collection?

Student: Tu veux la collection.

Teacher: Very good. Tu veux la collection. You want it, and wemean la collection?

‘And we mean ‘la collection’’ is preferable to ‘and we mean afeminine ‘it’’, because we are concerned with the practical thoughtprocess, which involves looking to the article of the noun we arereferring to.

Student: Tu la veux.

Teacher: Very good. Tu la veux.

Student: Tu la veux.

10.13 Teacher: Do you want it?

The interrogative helps mask repetition, and the repetition helps usto get as comfortable or even ‘automatic’ about using ‘la’ for ‘it’ aswe had become about using ‘le’. This helps ‘balance out’ the twoelements in the learner’s mind so that neither becomes anautomatic option.

Student: Tu la veux?

Teacher: Tu la veux? So we just can make a question tone with ourvoice, no? Do you want it? In English we added 'do' there but wedon’t need to worry about that for French. Tu la veux.

144

/ In drawing our learner’s attention to ‘do’ in a comfortable moment oflow cognitive load (we have repeated a previous sentence as aninterrogative), we can become increasingly more conscious of howwe are translating ideas rather than words. If we had already seenthe verb ‘to do’, we would have had to mention the interrogative ‘do’earlier to ensure that the two did not get confused.

10:29 Teacher: Now you may be thinking, how will I know whether aword is masculine or feminine? Or before that you may be thinkingwhy the hell are words masculine or feminine? Which is also a goodquestion. But it’s actually much simpler than it might seem to identifythe gender of the word, and it isn’t random. You will notice howcertain endings will show you what gender the word is. So forexample all of the -ion, -ION words, -ion in French, no, just likecollection, tradition, confirmation, all of these go with la. So howmight you say the reservation?

There is an important ‘mistake’ above. Take a moment to see if youcan spot it! What has the above explanation failed to clarify or inother words, possibly contributed to confusion about?We took a moment previously to define nouns, and we could haverecapped that definition quickly and replaced ‘word’ with ‘noun’above. Even though it is arguably ‘obvious’, it still makes sense toreaffirm that we are discussing nouns here to help prevent learnersfrom overgeneralising and getting tied up trying to fruitlessly workout the gender of a verb, for example. The mistake likely slippedthrough due to other elements of this explanation which werereceiving my focus. Those other elements include how we revivethe tension contour pertaining to possible qualms about both theconcept and application of gender, to then resolve it by showinghow deciding on a noun’s gender is actually quite simple.145

/ 11:08 Student: La re... reservation.

Teacher: La reservation. The tradition?

Student: La tradi... tradition.

Teacher: La tradition. The complication?

Student: La complication.

Teacher: Good, and the M here is also kind of slight.

The M is like the N in that it is nasalised. We don’t want to stop toexplain that here as our focus is on the -ION ending, but this wordwith its pronunciation issue is included for a reason. We get to givea casual description of the pronunciation and scoot over it, thisserves as a tiny bit of artificial friction to make this possibly repetitivevocabulary conversion section slightly more memorable, and alsoleaves a thread loose that we will later pick up again when we makea rule (rather than a description) about this pronunciation feature.

11:26 Teacher: La complication. How would you say opinion?Opinion?

Student: Opinion.

Teacher: Good. Opinion. If we say the opinion, as opinion startswith a vowel, we will lose the /a/ of la. So we get'l-apostrophe-opinion', so how, how might that sound?

Including the contraction helps us to internalise the A of ourfeminine article which is currently the subject of our focus. When we

146

/ discuss removing the A from ‘la’, we are necessarily focusing on itand thus strengthening our association of ‘la’ and ‘-ion’ words.We have also included a little further artificial friction in order tomake this association of ‘la’ and ‘-ion’ more memorable: we couldhave given the contraction with an example word and then solicitedit again with new examples, rather than describing the contractionbefore producing it, and leaving our learner to produce thecontraction through our description of it.

11:47 Student: L’opinion.

Teacher: L’opinion. L’opinion. The organisation?

Student: L’organisation.

Teacher: L’organisation. The passion?

This is again artificial friction to make sure our learner is still with us,and to challenge any automatic processes they may findthemselves tending towards! If the learner attempts to carry over ‘l’from the previous task sentences, then they will pronounce‘l’passion’ which would sound like ‘le passion’; effectively a mistakein the gender of the article.

11:59 Student: La passion.

Teacher: La passion. And less N. La passion.

Student: La passion.

147

/ Teacher: Very good. So you notice we get a lot of different types ofwords with this -ion pattern related to many different areas of life,and we can access them just through our Latin or French English.

We finish the lesson ‘warming down’, making the conversion rulethe artificial focus of the lesson. In this way, we can help avoid thatour learners try to remember what we have learnt in this first lesson,getting them used to just letting the material sink in.

Track 2

00:00 Teacher: What was the cake in French? A word we have inEnglish too?

With the second part of the above sentence we can coax those whoare focused on the English ‘cake’ out of trying to find the Frenchword from there, which may be an urge left over from thevocabulary conversion rule we were previously working with. ‘Aword we have in English too’ is implying that that word isn’t ‘cake’,and should lead our learner to ‘gateau’.We are also soliciting nouns in the way that we will want ourlearners to think about them: with their corresponding word for ‘the’which reminds us of its gender.We begin Track 2 in the same way that we began Track 1; with‘cake’. This helps show our learner all that they have learnt in theprevious 12 minutes, as we effortlessly build sentences around ‘legâteau’.

00:06 Student: Le gâteau.

Teacher: Le gâteau. I want?148

/ Student: Je veux.

Teacher: Je veux. You want?

Student: Tu veux.

Teacher: Tu veux. I want the cake?

Note the artificial friction above. The learner may expect us to beprogressing to ‘you want the cake’, but we move back to the ‘I’conjugation. In this way, we increase cognitive load and prevent orcorrect our learner from going on autopilot.

Student: Je veux le gâteau.

Teacher: Je veux le gâteau. I want it?

Student: Je le veux.

Teacher: Je le veux. Do you want it?

Some target sentences come as progressions, changing an elementfrom the previous target sentence, and other times the learnerneeds to discard previous target sentences completely in order tocreate new ones. In other situations, we do something in betweenand this can require a little more cognitive load. Above, if we think interms of target sentence progression, we are changing both theverb subject and adding an interrogative inflexion. Again, we areadding friction (which we could have avoided by first soliciting thenon-interrogative ‘you want it’). It makes only a slight difference, butthat can mean the difference between automatism and moreconscious thought from our learner. It also communicates that we

149

/ no longer need to take these steps for the learner, and so they aregaining autonomy in their new language.

Student: Tu le veux?

Teacher: Tu le veux? Very good. And if with this it we mean labaguette for example, how would you say this? Do you want it?

In using a word we have not yet seen, we are giving a slightlyweaker cue than if we gave an -ION word, which we now know arefeminine. By using ‘la baguette’, we force our student to check theword for ‘the’ to identify the word’s gender and decide on what ‘it’ touse. In this way, we are working to install that process of checkingwhich ‘it’ is appropriate. Using ‘baguette’, which also exists inEnglish, means we don’t have to stop to translate the new word,keeping our focus on its gender.

00:45 Student: Tu la veux?

Teacher: Tu la veux? Very good. The confirmation, how was theconfirmation?

Student: La confirmation.

Teacher: Good. And we have less N, no? On both of those Ns, a lotless N.

Again, this is solely directed at obtaining the correct pronunciation ofthe word rather than explaining the pronunciation as of yet, and alsogives us a second example like ‘complication’ (with two nasalisedNs/Ms) to later elaborate on.

150

/ It is paramount for the writer to remain very aware of what they haveexplained thus far and what they haven’t (this is of course the‘mental theatre’), lest we commit the fatal error of believing we haveexplained something we haven’t, just because we are using it.

Student: La confirmation.

Teacher: Very good. La confirmation. And also not pronouncingthat N kinda keeps the vowel in a different place in the mouth, whichis much more French. So, also we will notice we'll pronounce moreFrench vowels if we don’t pronounce those Ns. La confirmation.

Here we are giving an extra incentive to hold out on the N; it will putour mouths into a more French shape which will improve thepreceding vowels. This is a good motivation to make an effort withthe N, it’s almost as if we get something ‘for free’ for doing that (themore French-sounding vowels).This comment also constitutes a step in the explanation we areslowly working our way up to; we understand these sounds as asyllable here, which our eventual explanation will be based around.The description of the N has been simplified to ‘not pronouncing’,this shouldn’t be problematic due to the various subtler referenceswe have previously made about the pronunciation; it is simply amechanism to allow other parts of the explanation to take our focusnow (the vowels). Still, we might have used other words like ‘notfollowing through with those Ns’ to avoid any possible contradiction,but that would draw some focus away from the vowels.

01:17 Teacher: So we, we also saw how these -ion, -ion nouns arefeminine, no? And take la for the. And when we refer to them andwe say it, we use la. How would you say I want the confirmation?

151

/ We don’t need to give this reminder above, but of course we givemany more reminders and recaps than what are strictly necessary.This helps create confidence and clarify doubts, and when doneskillfully and periodically, learners will learn that they can continuethe course even if they have doubts (i.e. they don’t need to repeattracks) because their doubts will be addressed in our recaps. This inturn makes for more attentive learners: they will be looking for theseclarifications!Note also how we rewind a little, soliciting the preliminary ‘I want theconfirmation’ rather than going straight to ‘I want it’, which wouldseem like the logical next step of the above recap. This rewindinghelps counter automatism because our learner needs to produce asentence without ‘it’, even though we were just focused on thatword.

1:32 Student: Je veux la confir… Je veux la confirmation.

Teacher: Je veux la confirmation. I want it, and we mean theconfirmation?

Student: Je la veux.

This is the target sentence that the learner would have beenexpecting after our recap above, and so we resolve a small tensioncontour here. This helps us move into our novel material:

Teacher: Je la veux. So we’ve seen how we can access Frenchwords from our English, no, be them odd words that have enteredsuch as gâteau, café, or baguette for example, or big groups ofwords with the same endings, like those -ion words, ending -ION.

152

/ As we did previously (before introducing the vocabulary conversionrule), we categorise content we have learnt: we have odd words wecan pull in from English, and words from patterns, all under thesame umbrella of ‘words we pull in from English’. This helps usmove smoothly into a new vocabulary conversion rule:

02:03 Teacher: With our words ending -ation, so -ATION rather thanjust -ION, we can do something else which really expands ourFrench with very little effort, and allows us to literally makethousands of sentences very easily. So, whenever we have an-ation noun, one of those words we put the in front of, no, ending-ation, the confirmation, the organisation, we can generally find theverb, the word we can put to in front of, like to confirm, to organise,very easily.

We cue to how important this golden rule is by letting our learnersknow how they will get thousands of possibilities to communicatefrom it. We might expect our learner to doubt this, which will reallymake them perk up their attention!Our explicit contrast of ‘-ation’ and ‘-ion’ is important. Had we nottaken a second to say ‘rather than just -ION’ we might have createdsome confusion or unresolved tension here that would distract fromthe rest of the explanation.Like we did with ‘noun’ (recapped above), we define ‘verb’ by itsform (in English) at a moment in which we are working with andfocused on the very definition of a verb: the ‘to’ form. The twoexplanations about nouns and verbs also offer each othercoherence; in both cases we are adding something to the beginningof a word to determine its type (‘to’ or ‘the’).

153

/ What makes this explanation tangible are the examples(‘confirmation’ to ‘to confirm’, for example) and our intonation helpshighlight them.

02:39 Teacher: So we have confirmation, for example,confirmation, and if we want the verb to confirm, we just get rid ofthis -ation and we add ER and this is pronounced /e/. So we getconfirmer. Confirmer. To confirm.

Our explanation has come in two parts, we have shown the generalidea in English (further above) and then the mechanics of it forFrench (directly above).

02:55 Student: Confirmer.

Teacher: Confirmer. So that’s to confirm, even though to confirm inEnglish is two words, it’s just one idea, and that one idea of toconfirm, no, is one word in French, confirmer.

This ‘extra information’ above helps us repeat the item ‘confirmer’,and does this whilst contributing towards the separation ofidea/thought and language, which is an aim inherent in all courses.We do this by showing how in both cases we have one idea (toconfirm), but in French this is one word whilst in English it is two. Ifwe do not achieve that our learners are comfortable equating ideasto language (rather than only being able to equate language tolanguage) this will cause grave problems during our course time.

03:09 Teacher: Confirmer. So we don’t have to worry aboutremembering the words here, but just how to find them, and like

154

/ anything, it’s very easy to remember how to do it, doing it, with alittle practice. So, how would you say celebration in French?

We don’t want our learner to try to remember or be focused on‘confirmer’ itself of course, as if that were the important bit, butrather on the conversion rule. To strengthen the rule, we willpractice finding some new verbs in isolation, as we have let ourlearner know. But we have chosen a verb that cannot be guessed ator reached by using ‘‘confirm’ to ‘confirmer’’ as a template, whichmany learners will be tempted to do and which would lead us to theincorrect ‘celebrater*’ in this case. We prompt our learner towardsthe correct process by soliciting ‘celebration’ before ‘to celebrate’,but we know that many learners will jump straight to the verb andproduce the incorrect ‘celebrater*’, and in this way we indirectlycorrect that by sticking to our process and arriving at the (in such acase) unexpected ‘celebrer’.

03:24 Student: Célébration.

We do not need to mention the accented És which are pronouncedlike the English Es in ‘celebrate’. The fact they carry accents isimportant for us to differentiate between the E of ‘le’ and the oneswe pronounce here, but this is not the time or place to discuss it.

Teacher: Célébration. Now, to get to celebrate, we get rid of this-ation and we put ER, which sounds like /e/.

We repeat the process not because we think our learner may haveforgotten it already, but because we are emphasising with therepetition that this process has steps. This is aimed at counteringour learners' natural impulse to take a shortcut and jump from the

155

/ English to the French verb, which will only sometimes render thecorrect verb.This conversion rule could have also been presented in another waywith different weaving; for example, saving this rule for after wehave learnt more about word bases and endings so that we caneasily identify ‘-ate’ as a verb ending and remove it if its presentsuch as in verbs like ‘celebrate, participate, collaborate’. This wouldallow us to move directly between English and French verbs, but itwould also remove the test that ‘-ation’ represents in order to see ifwe can actually convert a verb in this way or not, the test being thatwe can make this conversion when we have an ‘-ation’ noun.

03:35 Student: /e/.

Teacher: So, to celebrate?

Student: Célébrer. Célébrer.

Teacher: Célébrer. I want to celebrate?

We have let our learner know that we will practice converting verbsnow, which would make them less likely to expect a target sentenceat this point, and even less so, one which gives us an entirely newstructure. Playing with expectation contours in this way makes thismoment of the course even more uplifting, adding to that feeling of ‘Ican’t believe I just said that!’.

S: Je veux célébrer.

T: Je veux célébrer.

S: Je veux célébrer.156

/ 03:50 T: I want to celebrate. Do you want to celebrate?

With the new sentence we get to review ‘tu’, but that is by the by.The main point here is to create another sentence using oursurprising new structure, either to revel a little longer in what wehave been able to do (before returning to our conversion rule), or togive remote learners who didn’t get it right the first time aroundanother chance to reproduce this structure.

Student: Tu veux célébrer?

Teacher: Good, but the tu is a longer vowel and we should project ita little bit more, poking our lips out and rounding them a little bit. Tu.

Weaving in such commentary is almost always a conscious decisionas we are not obliged to correct every minor issue of pronunciation.So why have we chosen to do it here specifically? Weaving in otherthings we have seen which do not require too much cognitive loadin themselves, helps divert just a little of our attention from what isat hand. Wanting to do this might appear counterintuitive of coursebut it isn’t; when we look away we will then have to look back, andthat is the exercise of recalling. Light weaving like this allows us tobreak away and recall gently before we do it in more abrupt ways.Note also how we have added the instruction of rounding the lips toour previous comments about poking them out. This is work thatpertains to that thread rather than to the current one; by slowlyincreasing instructions pertaining directly to the sound creatingapparatus (which we know can be stressful), we make them lessoverwhelming.

04:04 Student: Tu.157

/ Teacher: Good. Do you want to celebrate?

Student: Tu veux célébrer?

Teacher: Tu veux célébrer? A little, a little is un peu.

‘Un peu’ allows us to create more elaborate sentences and maskrepetition of the structure that we are seeing. It will also be usedlater to exemplify a consonant shift between English and French (Fto P as in ‘few’ to ‘peu’). Further to this, with ‘un’ we get anotherexample of a vowel-N/M syllable as in ‘con/m’ and ‘-ion’, which wewill later use to help exemplify this feature.

Student: Un peu.

Teacher: Un peu. This is spelt UN, this UN is just un. We think theN, again, we don’t pronounce it, we'll just think about it, it’s there.Un. Like we’re going towards it but we didn’t get there. And thenpeu.

In our description above, we are showing that this N is the same asthe semi-silent one we have seen thus far. Still, this is just adescription of the current sound, and we will piece thesedescriptions together later in order to form a rule.

04:30 Student: Un peu.

Teacher: And peu is like veux, the same vowel sound there whichwe get with EU.

We had mentioned how ‘le’ and ‘je’ shared a vowel, and now we dothe same for ‘peu’ and ‘veux’. It’s just a moment, but these momentscollectively help establish such points before they are made more158

/ explicit. This is possible even though we haven’t yet seen the fullspelling of ‘veux’; mentioning that both sounds are produced withEU is enough, there is no reason to account for the X yet.

04:36 Teacher: Un peu, a little.

Student: Un peu.

Teacher: Do you want to celebrate a little?

Student: Tu veux célébrer… Tu veux célébrer un peu?

Teacher: Tu veux célébrer un peu? So peu and veux have thesame vowel sound, no, which in both cases is achieved with an EUin writing. How would you say I want to celebrate a little? I want tocelebrate a little?

Repeating our point about the vowel spelling both helps to reinforcethe trace these comments leave, and also allows us to apply somedistance between the two similar target sentences so that ourlearner does something more similar to building the new targetsentence from scratch rather than just editing the previous one.

Student: Je veux célé… Je veux célébrer un peu.

Teacher: Je veux célébrer un peu. So if you are speaking and youwant to express something like to reserve, to invite, you can justcheck with yourself, do we have an -ation word in English to saythat? Reservation, yes. Invitation yes. And if so, then you canprobably find the verb in French.

Right after beginning to convert words in order to practice this rule(as we had advised our learner we were doing) we took a deviation159

/ from that path for some sentence construction. This allows us toreturn our diverted focus back to the conversion rule and in doingso, repeat it or an aspect of it. Here, our return to the conversionrule allows us to emphasise the practical application of the rule for anew learner communicating in their target language, whilst affirmingthe test we have to see if conversion is possible (the presence of an‘-ation’ noun in English). We weave this seamlessly into continuingthat thread of practicing the conversion:

05:30 Teacher: So how would you say participation?

Student: Participation.

Teacher: Participation. To participate?

Student: Participer.

Teacher: Participer. Very good. I want to participate?

Student: Je veux participer.

Note how the verbs chosen for these sentences do not requireobjects in English or in French in order to form complete sentences.Every time we return to our structure with ‘want’, we are showingour learner how we can think of ‘to celebrate’ or ‘to participate’ asone unit in sentence construction (rather than two words). Having agood grounding in the situations that we use infinitives will help uscontrast the infinitive to conjugated versions of the verb.

05:49 Teacher: Je veux participer. So the trick here is alsorealising that we know these words, no? You may be, you may bewanting to express something like I want to get involved and not

160

/ realise that you can say that in French because you don’t think of toparticipate for to get involved, no? Often the French way of sayingthings will sound much more formal in English. I want to participatesounds more formal than I want to get involved, no? But je veuxparticiper just sounds like I want to get involved in French. Itsounds very everyday. So sometimes you’ll have to make that jumpyourself to find the word you’re looking for. To get involved, oh, isthere an -ation way of saying that? Participation! Ah okay,participer.

Above, we get to repeat the important point we have madepreviously regarding the utility of the conversion rule, but we havealso expanded that idea. We have shown that sometimes languagemight ‘trick us’, leading us to think that we can’t say something thatwe otherwise can. We will need to open our minds or in other words,focus more on the idea we want to transcribe rather than on theword we want to translate, in order to find a word to translate! Wemake the point that those alternative wordings will not necessarilysound as unnatural in French as they might in English, both in orderto show that our conversion rule is more useful than it mightotherwise appear, and to increase language consciousness(regarding register).

06:36 Teacher: How would you say I want to get involved a little? Iwant to get involved a little?

After explaining how ‘participer’ might also translate as ‘to getinvolved’, we then use ‘to get involved’ to solicit the new targetsentence.

Student: Je veux participer un peu.161

/ Teacher: Very good. Je veux participer un peu. You want? Justyou want?

Student: Tu veux.

Teacher: Tu veux. Do you want to get involved?

Every time we use ‘get involved’, we have the potential to remindour learner of this possible leap in our conversion process, thisseparation from the strict idea that words and thoughts are thesame thing.

06:59 Student: Tu veux participer?

Teacher: Tu veux participer? Do you want to get a little involved?

As per the above comment, this target sentence continues thedissociation of language and thought; ‘participate a little’ hasbecome ‘get a little involved’, which has now changed the positionof ‘a little’. None of that should distract our learner from the ideawhich they are translating. Still, ‘un peu’ is flexible and so followingthe base language sentence order would not be problematic either:

Student: Tu veux participer un peu?

Teacher: Good. Tu veux participer un peu? And in the same way alittle can work its way into the middle there in English, no, do youwant to get a little involved?, we can do the same in French too, ifwe want. Tu veux un peu participer.

We follow up that the word order is flexible in French in order toaccount for remote learners that reproduce the word order of thebase language. We show that their sentence is not wrong, whilst162

/ also giving an example of flexible word order, which is somethingwe will want to do periodically during our course time. This isbecause it contributes to the wider idea that there is seldom just oneway of saying something (an idea we are also contributing to withour comments on linguistic register in the context of the conversionrule).

07:29 Teacher: How would you say I want to visit? So you would beforgiven for thinking ‘I can’t say that in French!’, but don’t decide tooquickly. We have visitation in English, we don’t use it very often,visitation. Visitation rights for example, for hospital or something, butthat’s enough to make you suspect that you can find to visit inFrench. So, I want to visit?

Note how the repetition of this very important point about diggingdeeper into our conversion rule is woven in with a target sentencewhich helps make the repetition interesting, relevant and applicable.‘To visit’ is a great verb for this as it is so common, whilst itscorresponding ‘-ation’ noun is so rare such that most non-nativeEnglish speakers may not be aware of it (which is why it’s given inthe explanation rather than solicited). Whether the remote learnerknew the noun or not, it is a great verb to exemplify all that there ishidden within this conversion rule! In this way, it makes for aparticularly upbeat end to our second lesson.

07:52 Student: Je veux visiter.

Teacher: Je veux visiter. Do you want to visit?

Student: Tu veux visiter?

Teacher: Tu veux visiter? Very good.163