German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: We can begin just by picking some words straight out of
   English and making them sound German. So, for example “learn", "to learn" in German is "lernen". So, to
   get "to learn" we just stuck EN on "learn". So we have "to learn" in English and "lernen" in German.
Student: Lernen
Teacher: Good. ”To find" is, we’ll do the same with "to find". So, how might that sound in German?
Student: Finden
Teacher: Finden, finden. The I we pronounce like E, “finden”. Finden, good. So the EN gives us “to learn - lernen”, “to find - finden”. What is "kommen"? What do you
   think that means? “Kommen”. You can work backwards now, so we were putting the EN
Student: Come, to come
Teacher: Bravo, to come. We were putting EN and now you can see that verb in German and take that N or EN away,
   “come”. "Ich will - ich will“, means "I want".
Student: Ich will
Teacher: Ich will. This "will" is connected to the word "voluntary - voluntary“ in English. When you are a volunteer,
   you do something because of the wanting of it, and that is connected here with "ich will". We also have
   another word, interestingly, that we build in a similar way in English, "amateur - amateur“, and you do it for
   the "amor", you do it for the love. So you have “amateur - voluntary” you do in a similar way in English.
   Voluntary, you do from wanting. "Ich will – I want”, like “voluntary”. How would you say, "I want to come"?
   What was “I want”?
Student: Ich will
Teacher: And “to come”?
Student: Kommen.
Teacher: Ich will kommen, good. “I want to come”. “I want to learn”? Ich will lernen
Student: Ich will lernen, good. So we have some words that we can just pull right from English and convert them into
   German. Another one would be "ich kann", what do you think that means? “Ich kann”
Teacher: I can
Student: I can, of course. I should mention as well you might hear instead of “ich”, “ich(k)” in Berlin, for example, the
   Berlin dialect. Or you might hear “I(s)ch" in the south of Germany. How would you say “I can come”? And ”I
   can come” is “I am able to come - I am able to come“ so we still use "to come” here.
Teacher: Ich kann kommen
Student: Ich kann kommen, and the “ich” is soft, not like “ich” but you could hear “ich(k)” like I mentioned in Berlin
   dialect. This harsh “ch” is not the sound that we get here, it’s “ich” so
Teacher: Ich
Student: “To go”, it changes a little bit but you will see the same principle “gehen”
Teacher: Gehen
Student: Gehen, this is spelled G E H E N and that H just stretches the vowel of “gehen”
Teacher: Gehen
Student: “I can go - I am able to go”
Teacher: Ich kann gehen
Student: Very good, ich kann gehen, very good. The word for “not” is “nicht”
Teacher: Nicht
Student: Nicht. “Ich” is spelled I C H and “nicht” N I C H T. How is “I can”, again?
Teacher: Ich kann
Student: Ich kann. And “I can not”?
Teacher: Ich kann nicht
Student: Good, ich kann nicht. “I can’t go - I am unable to go - I am not able to go”?
   Ich kann nicht goen, gehen
Teacher: Good, ich kann nicht gehen. What is “I want”?
Student: Ich will
Teacher: Ich will, good. “I don’t want” is “I want not”
Student: Ich will nicht
Teacher: Very good, ich will nicht. “I want not to go - I don’t want to go”?
Student: Ich will nicht gehen
Teacher: Very good. And rather than “gehen”, it’s more like “gehen”, the E a little bit further back, “ich will nicht
   gehen”, very good.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: What was “I can come”, or “I am able to come”?
Student: Ich kann kommen
Teacher: Good, ich kann kommen. If you want to make a question, “can I come?”, you do just as you do in English, so
   what did I do, to make “I can” come into a question, “can I come”?
Student: Kann ich kommen?
Teacher: Good you are just turning that “ich” and that “kann”, you are inverting them, “kann ich kommen? - Can I
   come?” Very good. What was “to go”?
Student: Gehen
Teacher: Gehen good, “I can go”?
Student: Ich kann gehen
Teacher: “Can I go?”?
Student: Kann ich gehen?
Teacher: We don’t want to hear any friction on that “ich”
Student: Kann ich gehen?
Teacher: Good. Kann ich gehen? “Can’t I go?”? Now to get something more short to work with, for German, it’s good
   to undo contractions in English, so rather than “can’t I go? - can I not go?” breaking that contraction of
   “can’t”, the order changes in English. And that’s closer to German. “Can I not go?”?
Student: Kann ich nicht gehen?
Teacher: Kann ich nicht gehen? Very good. So we can pull some verbs right over from English, as we’ve seen, just by
   sticking EN on them, you know? “Learn – lernen, find - finden, come - kommen”, but also, and more
   interestingly, there are consonants shifts to look out for. What does this mean? In the history of
   movements of the Germanic dialects, and other languages as well in the world, certain consonants shifts
   happen. Some consonants just decided to start being other consonants. So, if you can identify these
   patterns, you can decipher a lot of the vocabulary that you see and hear around you, and also access
   Germanic vocabulary that you already have in English, but that you don’t know you have. For example, you
   will find that many English P(s) become F(s) in German. “To hope - to hope”, is “Hoffen”. So you see the
   shift from P to F in English to German. How do you think you would say "to help"?
Student: Helf
Teacher: Good, and what do you do to make that “to help”?
Student: Helfen
Teacher: Helfen, exactly, helfen. “I want to help”?
Student: Ich will helfen
Teacher: Ich will helfen. “I can help”?
Student: Ich kann helfen
Teacher: Ich kann helfen. “Can I help?”?
Student: Kann ich helfen?
Teacher: Kann ich helfen? Very good. “I can’t help”?
Student: Ich kann nicht helfen
Teacher: Good, but with less CH
Student: Ich kann nicht helfen
Teacher: Very good, ich kann nicht helfen. So you can have a strong T on “nicht”, because you will hear that T in
   German, you will pronounce it, but without the CH
Student: Nicht
Teacher: Nicht, very good. Ich kann nicht helfen. “Can’t I help? - Can I not help?”?
Student: Kann ich nicht helfen?
Teacher: Very good, Kann ich nicht helfen? Good. “Schlafen” is “to sleep - schlafen”
Student: Schlafen
Teacher: Good. Now, the vowel changes are also common and they might appear quite random, we see we get
   “sleep” and then “schlafen”, but if you hear these in context and you know the P to F shift, you won’t have
   a hard time working out what’s going on and learning the word when you hear it “schlafen”, even though it
   sounds more different to “sleep”. How would you say “I want to sleep”?
Student: Ich will schlafen
Teacher: Ich will schlafen, so you have SCH and L together, “schlafen”
Student: Schlafen
Teacher: Good, enjoy it! Putting all those sounds together. German gives you quite a lot of these opportunities
Student: Schlafen
Teacher: Schlafen “I don’t want to sleep”?
Student: Ich will nicht schlafen
Teacher: Ich will nicht schlafen, “I can’t sleep”?
Student: Ich kann nicht slafen, schlafen
Teacher: So don’t rush it, take your time
Student: Ich kann nicht schlafen
Teacher: Even slower, because of the languages that we speak already, there are certain sound combinations that sit
   comfortably with us or sound more common to us and others that don’t. This can make some sounds more
   difficult to pronounce, like the SCHL in “schlafen”, or it can even make you put in extra sounds, like
   “schlaften”, you were saying. So, the only way you can control this is just by slowing down
Student: Ich kann nicht schlafen
Teacher: Good. You see what I mean?
Student: I do
Teacher: You know many words in German that you don’t expect to know and if you are looking out for them, you
   will find them. For example “to reipen - to reipen”, when a fruit ripens
Student: Reifen
Teacher: Reifen - reifen, Good. Other words you might not expect to know in German, “ape”, for example?
Student: Afe
Teacher: Afe
Student: “Ship”?
Teacher: Schiff
Student: Schiff! Exactly. So what was “to sleep”?
Teacher: Schlafen
Student: Perfect, schlafen. “Einschlafen” is “to fall asleep”, “to in-sleep”. That "ein" is "in - einschlafen”, “to fall in
   sleep”
Teacher: Einschlafen.
Student: “I can’t fall asleep”?
   Ein-nicht-slafen
Teacher: Slowly... “I can’t” is the first bit
Student: Ich kann nicht slafen, einslafen, schlafen
Teacher: Good, you’re pushing yourself just a little bit faster than you’re comfortable with, no? Take your time and
   enjoy putting the sentence together. Don’t have that stress of rushing yourself. First bit “I can’t - I can not”
Student: Ich kann nicht slafen.
Teacher: The first bit only if you think about. If you are only thinking about the first bit you don’t jump over things,
   other problems you might have gotten over if you went a little bit slower, no? So let’s do just the "I can’t”
Student: Ich kann nicht
Teacher: Good, and the pronunciation was better this time, no? Less CH because you could think just about that bit
   “Ich kann nicht”. Now think about "to fall asleep", so what was "to fall asleep" in German? How would you
   say it in German?
Student: Ins schlafen
Teacher: To "in sleep", good. Einschlafen. So altogether, “I can’t fall asleep”
Student: Ich kann nicht einschlafen
Teacher: “I don’t want to fall asleep”?
Student: Ich will nicht einschlafen
Teacher: Ich will nicht einschlafen, good.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: What was “to come”?
Student: Kommen
Teacher: So, “kommen” is “to come”. If you say “ich komme - ich komme” it’s “I come” or “I’m coming”
Student: Ich komme
Teacher: Ich komme. So, we remove the N, we take that N away of the “to” form “kommen” which is “to come” and
   we get “ich komme - I come”. So, how is “I learn” or “I am learning”?
Student: Ich lerne
Teacher: Ich lerne, good. From “lernen - ich lerne”. “I am hoping - I hope”
Student: Ich hof
Teacher: We take the N of, so you have “hoffen”?
Student: Ich hoffe
   Good, ich hoffe. Not “ich hof”, there you are going directly from “hope”, no? But what you want to do is “to
   hope - hoffen”
Teacher: Hoffe
Student: Bravo. And then (??) with it. Perfect. “I am going”
Teacher: Ich gehe
Student: Very good, ich gehe. “Es” E S, “es” is “it”, in German, “es”.
Teacher: Es
Student: “I want it”?
Teacher: Ich will es
Student: Very good, ich will es. You might also hear “ich will’s” in spoken German as a contraction “ich will’s”
Teacher: Ich will’s
Student: What is “to find”?
Teacher: Finden
Student: Finden, good. “I’m finding it”?
Teacher: Ich finde es
Student: Ich finde es, good. “I’m not finding it”? In German you would say “I’m finding it not - I find it not” like old
   English “I find it not”. You will notice that the structure in German is often like old English “I find it not”
Teacher: Ich finde nicht
Student: I find it not
Teacher: Ich finde es nicht
Student: Ich finde es nicht, very good. You might have heard “thank you” in German “danke”
Teacher: Danke
Student: Danke. This presents us a new consonant shift: English TH becoming D in German, “thank - danke”. If
   “danke” is “I thank”, no? When we say “thank you” we are saying “I thank you”, what is “to thank”?
Teacher: Danken
Student: Very good, danken. So we could walk backwards, also. We can walk from “danke” the “I” version to get the
   “to” form. “Danken - to thank”. So, we said that we have TH to D, English TH to German D. “To think” is
   “denken - denken”
Teacher: Denken
   So we have a vowel change again but we could recognize that in context “denken - to think”. How would
   you say “to bathe - to bathe”?
Student: Baden
Teacher: Baden - Baden. And a “bath”? Like a “bath”, the “bath”?
Student: Bad
Teacher: Bad. “I’m bathing”?
Student: Ich bade
Teacher: Ich bade. If you have “Bruder”, what would you think it is, “Bruder”?
Student: Brother
Teacher: Brother, good. “Mein Bruder”?
Student: My brother
Teacher: My brother, good. So “mein”, we have the word “mine” in English as well but we use it in a different way,
   “mein” is “my” in German “mein Bruder - my brother”
Student: Mein Bruder
Teacher: And you notice that the German accent here is much like the English, you have ER at the end of “brother”,
   but you don’t really pronounce it like in ER, it’s a little bit like an A, “Bruder”. “My brother can come - my
   brother is able to come - my brother can to come”?
Student: Mein Bruder kann kommen
Teacher: Very good, mein Bruder kann kommen. “Can my brother come?”?
Student: Kann mein Bruder kommen?
Teacher: Very good, kann mein Bruder kommen? Good. “Can’t my brother come?”? So again we will undo the
   contraction to find the right order in German, so “can my brother not come?”?
Student: Kann mein Bruder nicht kommen?
Teacher: Very good, kann mein Bruder nicht kommen? - can’t my brother come? What do you think “ding” means in
   German? “Ding”?
Student: Thing
Teacher: Of course. You can use the word “then” in German, like “because”. How would “then” be in German?
   “Then”?
Student: Denn
Teacher: Denn, good. So you can use this word like “because”. “Can my brother come because I can’t - Can my
   brother come because I can’t”? So, let’s start with “can”
   Kann mein Bruder kommen
Student: Good. Because, or, then?
Teacher: Denn
Student: I can’t
Teacher: Ich kann nicht
Student: Very good. Kann mein Bruder kommen denn Ich kann nicht. “I want to go because I can’t sleep - I want to
   go because I can’t sleep” so the first bit is “I want to go”
Teacher: Ich will gehen
Student: Because?
Teacher: Denn
Student: Like English “then - denn”, I can’t sleep
Teacher: Ich kann nicht einshlefen - einshlafen
Student: You said “because I can’t fall asleep” no? Which makes sense here as well. “Ich will gehen denn ich kann
   nicht einschlafen” or “ich kann nicht schlafen”, both would be fine.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: What was “I want”?
Student: Ich will
Teacher: Ich will. “Ich will” is spelled W I L L, W I L L which looks like, what does that look like?
Student: Will
Teacher: It looks like “will” in English, no? And, in fact, it is the “will” in English. Now “ich will” means “I want” not “I
   will” but the word “will” in English comes from the German “want”. When you say “I will go” in English you
   are actually saying “I want, I want to go”. In fact we still use the word “will” like “want” in some situations
   in English. We say “the will of the people”, that’s “the want of the people”. We say “I don’t have the will to
   do it - I don’t have the want to do it”. So, when we say “I will eat” we are actually saying something like “I
   want/wish to eat”. And this used to be “shall” more commonly in English “I shall go” related to the meaning
   of “should”, so maybe this marked a change of mentality, the future is not about what should be but what
   you want to be. “Ich will” is “I want”. In fact, in German, you don’t really need the word for “will” to speak
   about the future, most of the time. If we have a word that shows us that we are speaking about the future
   we don’t have any need for the word “will”, in German. So, for example, the word for “tomorrow” and also
   “morning”, in German, is “morgen”
Student: Morgen
Teacher: Morgen. Interestingly like Spanish “mañana” which means “tomorrow” and also “morning”, “morgen”
   means “tomorrow” and it means “morning”. So, “I will help tomorrow - I will help tomorrow” in German
   you can just say “I help tomorrow”. How would that be?
Student: Ich helfe morgen
Teacher: Good, ich helfe morgen, good. “I am coming tomorrow”?
Student: Ich komme morgen
Teacher: Ich komme morgen, good. So we see in the spelling of “ich will” W I L L that the W produces a V sound in
   German. So, this isn’t a consonant shift, it’s still a W. Just the W in German sounds like V. How do you think
   you’d say “to wash”, in German? “To wash”
Student: Waschen
Teacher: Waschen
Student: Waschen
Teacher: How would you say “I am washing it”?
Student: Ich wasche es
Teacher: Very good, ich wasche es. “I’ll wash it tomorrow - I will wash it tomorrow” or “I am going to wash it
   tomorrow”?
Student: Ich wasche es morgen
Teacher: Very good, ich wasche es morgen. “We”, in German, is “wir - wir” W I R, “wir”
Student: Wir
Teacher: Good, and it’s very much like the English contraction of “we are”, no? “We’re - wir” so that’s “we”. Now,
   “we” you can use with the “to” form of the verb, that means “wir kommen” means “we are comming” or
   “we come”. You don’t have to worry about changing “kommen”, just leave it as it is. “We are finding it”?
Student: Wir finden es
Teacher: Wir finden es, good. “To want”, so we have “ich will - I want”. “To want” is “wollen - wollen”
Student: Wollen
Teacher: So here we see actually that “will” is irregular. It is not “ich wolle” like you might have expected it to be
   “ich will” but with “wollen - to want” we see much closer the connection with “voluntary” that we
   mentioned before “wollen - voluntary”. So “wollen” is “to want”. How do you say “we want”?
Student: Wir wollen
Teacher: Wir wollen, “we want to come”?
Student: Wir wollen kommen
Teacher: Very good, wir wollen kommen. “We are coming”?
Student: Wir kommen
   “We are coming tomorrow” or “we will come tomorrow” or “we are going to come tomorrow”, “is going
   to” in English is just a future, you won’t try to translate that with “gehen”. So “we will come tomorrow”?
Teacher: Wir kommen morgen
Student: Very good, wir kommen morgen. “We’ll find it tomorrow”?
Teacher: Wir finden morgen
Student: “Find it tomorrow”
Teacher: Wir finden es morgen
Student: Good, wir finden es morgen. So we saw how the German W sounds like the English V “ich will - I want,
   wollen - to want, wir - we, waschen - to wash”. The German S can sound like the English Z. For example, “to
   see” in German is “sehen”
Teacher: Sehen
Student: Sehen, is spelled S E H E N and again we have that H stretching out the vowel “sehen”. Unless word is
   pronounced really slowly or enphaticly, you are not going to hear that H, it’s just an extension of the vowel.
   But if somebody pronounces the word slowly for you, you might hear “sehen”, you might feel like you are
   hearing that H but in fluent speach you won’t hear it. “Gehen - to go, sehen - to see”
Teacher: Sehen
Student: “We see it”?
Teacher: Wir sehen es
Student: Good, wir sehen es. So the letter S on the word for “it - es”, sounds like an S. The S on “sehen” sounds like a
   Z and that’s what happens when we have an S and a vowel starting a syllable “sehen”. “We’ll see it
   tomorrow”?
Teacher: Wir sehen es morgen
Student: Good, wir sehen es morgen. “I will see it tomorrow”?
Teacher: Ich sehen es morgen
Student: Mmmh
Teacher: Ich sehe es morgen
Student: Very good, ich sehen es morgen. Good.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: What was “to see”? We had the ‘s’ of English sounding like a ‘z’ there in German.
Student: “Sehen”
Teacher: “Sehen”... Good. The word for “they” and also the word for “you”, “the formal you”, The formal way to
   address somebody in German is “Sie”
Student: “Sie”
Teacher: This is spelt S-I-E. So we get the ’s’ again making the ‘z’ sound and the i-e making the ‘ee’ sound. “Sie”
Student: “Sie”
Teacher: Now, like we have “wir”, we can use the “to form” of the verb, we don’t have to change it. We don’t have
   to worry about doing anything to it, taking anything off. We just use that form. So if you want to say, “they
   are coming” or “you” speaking formally ..Sie…?
Student: “Sie kommen”
Teacher: “Sie kommen”. Good. “They are not coming? You are not coming?”
Student: “Sie nicht kommen”
Teacher: Now this is the English order, no? In German, how is it?
Student: “Sie kommen nicht”
Teacher: “Sie kommen nicht”…very good. They are not coming tomorrow... Now generally speaking “tomorrow” the
   time expression, when something is happening. I’m going to come before “nicht”. “They are coming not
   tomorrow”. How‘d that be?
Student: “Sie kommen morgen nicht”
Teacher: Very good, “Sie kommen morgen nicht”. So “morgen” the time expression can move to stress, but the
   general position is before “nicht”. “Sie kommen morgen nicht”, but if you wanted to stress not tomorrow,
   they are coming on Tuesday, not tomorrow. Then we might hear “nicht morgen”, but the common order
   would be “sie kommen morgen nicht”. “Aren’t they coming tomorrow?” How will that be? So we need to
   make a question here. It’s very confusing in English. Aren’t they? Are they not? But all we need to think is
   that, in German we need to make the question and for the question we need inversion. We need to switch
   the position of “they” and they are coming?. Aren’t they coming tomo?
Student: “Kommen sie morgen nicht?”
Teacher: Very good. “Kommen Sie morgen nicht” very good. You must have made the question tone with your
   voice quite obvious. Without it, you are saying come tomorrow. “Kommen Sie morgen”. This is the order.
   So in German you have this inversion switching the position of the person and the verb for the question.
   “Kommen sie” and also the order, “kommen Sie”, so how would u say “come tomorrow”?
Student: “Kommen Sie morgen”
Teacher: “Kommen Sie morgen”. Good. Don’t come tomorrow.
Student: “Kommen sie morgen nicht”
Teacher: Good. “kommen Sie morgen nicht”. “Don’t come tomorrow. Aren’t you coming tomorrow? “
Student: “Kommen Sie morgen nicht”
Teacher: Good. “Kommen Sie morgen nicht”. So the inversion gives you the order and the question. And now it
   depends on the tone of voice. So how would u say,” are you finding it or are they finding it” , so you don’t
   have to work with are they finding it , that’s very complicated in English, no? We want to think , “you are
   finding it and make it into a question.
Student: “Finden Sie es?”
   Very good. “Finden Sie es?”. “Are you finding it”. How you say? Find it.
Teacher: “Finden sie es”
Student: Very good. “Finden sie es”. So that’s the order and the qn,Good. So you get both there in German. Can you
   find it tomorrow?
Teacher: “Finden sie es morgen.”
Student: “Finden sie es morgen.”. good. Will you find it tommorow?
Teacher: “Finden sie es morgen?’
Student: Good. “Finden sie es morgen”.good. what was to go?
Teacher: “Gehen”
Student: “Gehen” good and we are going
Teacher: Wir
Student: How does ‘w’ sound in german.
Teacher: ‘V’
Student: “Wir gehen”
Teacher: Good .”wir gehen”. are we going?
Student: Gehen wir?
Teacher: Gehen wir? Let’s go. Also the order no. lets’s go
Student: Gehen wir
Teacher: Gehen wir. You just have to change your tone. Gehen wir
Student: Gehen wir
Teacher: Let’s go. Gehen wir. Are we going? We saw before the th to d shift. Thank danke, think denke. The word for
   the , one of the word for the. In German is die. Like the English die. ‘The’ sometimes pronounced like die in
   English no? we seen German is d-i-e
Student: Die
Teacher: So we saw as in die, those who are hearing die, the i-e just gives us the i-e sound, Sie, ie. The children is die
   kinder. Die kinder.like in kindergarden, actually your familiar with this word. Child garden or in nursery. Die
   kinder.
Student: Die kinder
Teacher: How would you say “the children are coming”?
Student: Die kinder kommen.
Teacher: Very good. “Die kinder kommen”.” Are the children coming?” so again this gets a little complicated in
   English. Are the children coming.. all u need to think in German, is that u r making the inversion to make
   the question. Die children kommen, to make as the qn. Are the children coming?
Student: Kommen die kinder?
Teacher: Very good. Kommen die kinder? How would u say “the children not coming?” “Children come not”
Student: Die kinder kommen nicht.
Teacher: Die kinder kommen nicht. Aren’t the chldren coming?
Student: Kommen die kinder nicht?
Teacher: Very good. “Kommen die kinder nicht?” very good . “to sing” in German is “singen” Singen. so again we
   have the ‘s’ like a ‘z’. singen.
Student: Singen.
Teacher: Good. They are singing, they will sing tomorrow, or they are going to sing tomorrow.
Student: Sie singen morgen
Teacher: good. sie singen morgen. So again what’s the word for they or formal you
Student: Sie.
Teacher: Sie .good. this is also the word for them. So “they , them” we have change in English, but we don’t have it in
   german. They and them are sie and sie. They ar seeing them tomorrow. How would that be? They are
   seeing them tomorrow
Student: Sie sehen sie morgen
Teacher: Sie sehen sie morgen.good. “they are seeing them tomorrow”. How would u say “they are washing it”?
Student: Sie waschen es
Teacher: Very good. Sie waschen es.
Student: “They are washing them”
Teacher: Sie waschen sie.
Student: Sie waschen sie, very good.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: How is see?
Student: “Sehen”
Teacher: “Sehen”. And “they see” or “they are seeing” or “you (formal) see”
Student: “Sie sehen”
Teacher: “Sie sehen”. SO this is the formal you, the one we will use to be polite, the one we will use when we don’t
   know somebody, the one we will use when we speak to elders and when we speak in a formal
   environment, “Sie”. “Sie sehen”. You (formal) see or they see. What was the word for “I”?
Student: “Ich”
Teacher: “Ich”. The word for “me” is “mich”
Student: “mich”
Teacher: M-I-C-H, and again no friction on the C-H , we shouldn’t hear miCH . “mich”, no?
Student: Mich
Teacher: Mich… Ich, mich , nicht , nie… “They see me”
Student: “Sie sehen mich”
Teacher: “Sie sehen mich”…good. “They will see me tomorrow”.
Student: “Sie sehen mich morgen”
Teacher: Very good. “Sie sehen mich morgen”. “Won’t you see me tomorrow?” “You won’t me see me tomorrow”,
   so the first thing we should think about is just making the “you see” as a question.
Student: “sehen sie nicht mich morgen “
Teacher: Good, but we said “Won’t you see me tomorrow?”. So where is that “not” going to come?
Student: Sehen sie nicht…
Teacher: So “nicht””es”, words like this next to the verb. “Sehen sie nicht” and then word comes.
Student: Nicht..Sehen sie mich morgen nicht?
Teacher: Very good. The common decision on that when the time expression, when something happens is before the
   nicht. “Sehen sie mich morgen nicht”. “Aren’t you seeing me tomorrow?”. In this circumstance tomorrow is
   just a detail.NO? “aren’t you seeing me tomorrow?”. But if you want to stress “tomorrow” then we might
   move the position “sehen sie mich nicht morgen”… “sehen sie mich nicht morgen”. You might hear that as
   well. But the general standard position is that how when before “nicht”. “Sehen sie mich morgen nicht”.
   What was “it”?
Student: “es”
Teacher: “es”. This is another consonant which we learn in German. The English ‘T’ becoming the German S’ . “it”
   “es”. So now in that, how’d you think you would make “to eat” , “to eat”
Student: “ess”
Teacher: That’s the first thing you do. Now, you change the’ t’ to ‘s’, and now what you do to get “to eat”
Student: “essen”
Teacher: “essen”, very good. That’s to eat. “essen”. It’s also the word for “food”in German. In English, we hae
   “delicatessen” , no? In some supermarkets, “delicatessen” this is delicate foods. How do you think you
   would say “water”?
Student: “Wasser”
Teacher: “Wasser”. Very good. ‘W’ sounds like a ‘V’and ‘T’ to’S’,” Wasser”. “Better”?
Student: “Besser”
Teacher: “Besser”. How do you say “WE’ll eat it tomorrow”? So “we’ll eat it tomorrow”
Student: “Wir essen es morgen”
Teacher: “Wir essen es morgen”. “We’ll eat it tomorrow”. “We’ll eat them tomorrow”?
Student: “Wir essen sie morgen”
Teacher: Very good. “Wiressen sie morgen”… “I’m eating it”?
Student: “Ich esse es”
Teacher: “Ich esse es”…very good.How do you think, this you have to guess , How o you think they’d say “they hate
   it”. “They hate it”?
Student: “SIe hassen es”
Teacher: Good. “Sie hassen es”. “They hate it”, “sie hassen es”. “They hate them”?
Student: “Sie hassen sie”
Teacher: “They hate me” ?
Student: “Sie hassen mich”
Teacher: “Sie hassen mich”. Good. What do you think “vergessen” mean? “vergessen“. If you to hear around what’d
   be your guess?
Student: “FOrget”
Teacher: Very good. Forget. Now you take up the –en , you check you have any consonant switches and there you
   would find the verb in English. “vergessen” “forget”. How would you say “I’m forgetting it”…
Student: “Ich vorgesse es”
Teacher: And that’s “vergessen” not “Vorgessen”. “Ich vergesse es”… good. “I’m forgetting myself” or “I’m forgetting
   me”, the word for “me” also mean “myself” is funny way to say that “I get crazy ”, “I lose my temper”, “I get
   angry” in German. We can use that , so “I forget me”, “I forgetmyself” . How would that be?
Student: “Ich vergesse mich”
Teacher: “Ich vergesse mich”, “ICh vergesse mich”, bear in your mind, the ‘t’ to ‘s’, how would you say “I must”
Student: “Ich muss”
Teacher: “Ich muss”.
Student: “Ich muss”.
Teacher: I must go. This is like “I must TO go”. “I have TO go”.
Student: “Ich muss gehen”
Teacher: “ICh muss gehen”, bery good. “Imust eat”, “I have to eat”, so this is used as a very normal verb in German
   not so heavy a sit sounds in Englsih, a sin “I must”, In German this is what you’ll use for “I have to”, so “I
   have to eat”, “I must eat”
Student: “Ich muss essen”
Teacher: Very good. “Ich muss essen”.So we said this is more like “have to ” than “must” if we compare it to English,
   you know “must” and “muss“ are the same word. In the ame way, If you say “I must not”, It sounds much
   more like “I don’t have to ” rather than “I must not ”, So If you want to say “I don’t have to eat”, you can
   say “I must not eat”, and to the German ear this is going to sound like, “I don’t have to eat”. Not “I musnt
   eat”. So how would you say that? “I don’t have to eat”
Student: “Ich muss essen nicht”
Teacher: “I must not eat”, “I don’t have to eat” …First , “I must not ”, “I musnt ”, “I don’t have to”…
Student: “Ich muss nicht”
   “to eat”?
Teacher: “essen”
Student: Bravo… “Ich muss nicht essen”…”I don’t have to eat”.. “I don’t have to come”
Teacher: “Ich muss ncht kommen”
Student: Good. “Ich muss nicht kommen”.So this isn’t “I musnt come” but “I don’t have to ”… You can also use this
   like the English “Must I go?”, “Do I have to go?”No…Like when you don’t want to do something “do I have
   to”, “Must I”, you can use this in the same way in German as well. So how would you say that “Must I”?
   “Must I?”
Teacher: “Muss ich?“
Student: Bravo. “Muss ich”, “Muss ich”. “Must I go?” “Do I have to go?”
Teacher: “Muss ich gehen?”
Student: “Muss ich gehen?” “Do I have to eat?”
Teacher: “Muss ich essen?”
Student: “Muss ich essen”, very good.
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: So some other words with this t to s switch(t s) ,the word for big is groß like great,you see the t switching to
   s, since some vowels changing. What do you think das means?
Student: that
   Good,we have the d to th and the s to t.So we have two letter switches happening there (th d, t s) And
   this can also be used like this...So das is this or that...The word for is is ist..So now you could say this is big
   or that is big or great. So let’s make a recoup of these words...What is this or that?
Teacher: Das
Student: And what is is?
Teacher: ist
Student: and big or great?
Teacher: groß
Student: how do you say this is big?
Teacher: Das ist groß
Student: this is not big
Teacher: das ist nicht groß
Student: this is bettter
Teacher: das ist besser
Student: is this/that better?
Teacher: Ist das besser?
Student: isnt this better. And as i mentioned before deconstructing takes you closer to the german order. Is this not
   better?
Teacher: ist das nicht besser?
Student: How do you think you would say out in german?
Teacher: aus
Student: ausgehen means to go out like to a bar or club or something. How do you say i want to go out?
Teacher: ich will ausgehen..
Student: we can use the word then like because in german,so what is then in german
Teacher: denn..
Student: i want to go out because i can’t sleep
Teacher: ich will ausgehn denn ich kan nicht einschlafen/schlafen
Student: ausschlafen,to out sleep means to sleep in,so to sleep in in german is to sleep out,to have a long sleep in the
   morning.I want to sleep in
Teacher: ich will ausschlafen..so we have einslclaphen to fall asleep and ausschlafen to out sleep which actually
   means to sleep in.
Student: how do you think you say what in german?
Teacher: was
Student: we have the w sounds like v and t to s switch..
Teacher: what was to want? Somethig more like voluntary?
Student: wollen
Teacher: what do they/you(formal)want?
Student: was wollen sie/Sie?
Teacher: What do you want to eat?
Student: was wollen sie essen?
Teacher: what are we eating?
Student: was essen wir?
Teacher: And how do you say what is this?
Student: was ist das?
Teacher: So the word for it was es and the word for is was ist.How do you say it is?
Student: es ist...
Teacher: what was the word for big/great?
Student: groß
Teacher: it is big
Student: es ist groß
Teacher: it is not big
Student: es ist nicht groß
German Track - Level: Beginner
Teacher: We've seen some letter changes, english P to german F (hope hoffen), english T to german S
   (eat essen),english TH to german D (thank danke) and we also saw that some letters stay the same but
   sound different in german, the english S can sound like Z ,can in English as well although in quite different
   positions to German. We’ve also seen that W sounds like V, the german V sounds like F.”Verstehen” means
   to understand. So again we see the V sounding like an F and then we get “stehen”,that H as we saw before
   it’s just stretching the vowel and ST gives us st just as we got sl in”schlafen” to sleep, we get an sh sound .
   How would you say I understand?
Student: Ich verstehe..
Teacher:  I want to hear the “sht”. Again. If this is an uncomfortable sound for you, you won't get it by going faster,
   you will have to slow down to make sure you putting those sounds in.”I don't understand”(= I understand not)
Student: Ich verstehe nicht..
Teacher: “ I don't understand it”
Student: Ich verstehe nicht es...
Teacher: In german these little words like es,mich,sie, they're going to come next to the verb
Student: Ich verstehe es nicht..
Teacher: Very good. I understand it not in german.” I don't understand them” or” I don't understand you”
Student: Ich verstehe sie/Sie nicht..
Teacher: Very good. Interestingly “stehen” by itself means to stand , so we have in english to under stand and in
   german we have ver stehen so stehen is to stand. How do we say “we understand”?
Student: Wir verstehen..
Teacher: “We understand you/them”?
Student: Wir verstehen sie/Sie..
Teacher: “We don't understand them”?
Student: Wir verstehen sie nicht..
Teacher:  Again take more time to make sure you're getting the “sht” in verstehen
Student: “Do you understand?”
Teacher: Verstehen Sie?
Student: “Don’t you understand?”
Teacher: Verstehen Sie nicht?..
Student: “Don’t you understand me?”
Teacher: Verstehen Sie micht nicht?...
Student: Good. So we said that this “stehen” is to stand now this “sh” sound with another consonant like”schlafen” to
   sleep, ”stehen” to stand is what you would have to get very used to in German. In German when you get an
   S and another consonant starting a syllable, you will get this “sh” sound appearing. For example the word
   “spät” with two little dots, those two dots over A make sound like E,is the word for late. In Berlin for example
   you will see everywhere “spätkauf”, late buy, which is like an off- license or a convenience store. Knowing
   that “spätkauf” means late buy,how do you think you would say “to buy”?
Teacher: Kaufen..
Student: Bravo. Which we can take from“spätkauf”. So you can identify words like this in German which are built of
   different words is a very common
   occurrence in german and you can maybe extract of the vocabulary from these words
   like“spätkauf” kaufen=to buy
Teacher: “I am buying it”
Student: Ich kaufe es..
Teacher: ‘’I am not buying it”
Student: Ich kaufe es nicht..
Teacher: What was the word for late,again?
Student: Spät..
Teacher: Later is später, you do the same as you do in english, you just add er (late later). “I’ll buy it later”?
Student: Ich kaufe es später..
Teacher: “I’ll buy them later”
Student: Ich kaufe sie später..
Teacher: These “sp”,” “sl” sounds are especially unfamiliar to you, so you need to slow down to insist with yourself to
   get those sounds. You
   don't want to skip over. You might not be understood in German if you don’t pronounce it.
   “They'll buy it tomorrow”. So we have a “they” here, we have a “it” here.We want to start with the verb,who is
   buying it.
Student: Sie kaufen es morgen..
Teacher: If you start with who is buying, if you are sure of that, the rest will fit into place.
Student: “They’ll buy them tomorrow”
Teacher: Sie kaufen sie morgen..
Student: “They won’t buy them tomorrow”
Teacher: Sie kaufen sie morgen nicht..
Student: Tell me again what was “to understand” ?
Teacher: Verstehen..
Student: Good. You can make it. You only need to care enough about it to correct that mistake. If you don't care you
   will just not but is very important.
   “To sell” is verkaufen, so we take this ver and we get to sell from to buy.You will see this ver around a lot in
   German. We've already seen verstehen,verkaufen and also vergessen=to forget. How would you say
   “they/you are selling it”?
Teacher: Sie/sie verkaufen es..
Student: “Are they/you selling it”?
Teacher: Verkaufen sie/Sie es?..
Student: And how about the order? “Sell it!”
Teacher: Verkaufen Sie es!..
Student: “Aren’t they/you selling it?”
Teacher: Verkaufen sie/Sie es nicht?
Student: And the order? “Don’t sell it”
Teacher: Verkaufen sie es nicht!..
Student: But is important also to make it sound like an order.And how is”We sell”?
Teacher: Wir verkaufen..
Student: “What are we selling?”
Teacher: Was verkaufen wir?...
Student: Very good. And this is again an excellent example that you don't need to worry about memorizing because
   you found was from what. We took the in betweens them.You went from what to wat and then to was. That’s
   perfect. That's how you find the words that you know without having to worry about your memory. Just see
   where your first thought will take you and will take you somewhere. And if this somewhere it's not where you
   want to go,it probably take you where you want to go. What wat was. Very good.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: Teacher: So, we mentioned spätkauf, which is like a convenience store. Literally meaning “late-
   buy,” ‘cause they tend to be open until late. So, we have spät, or late, and kauf, for buy, what was
   “later”?
   Student: Später.
   Teacher: Später, good. And what was “to buy”?
   Student: Kaufen.
   Teacher: Kaufen. Good. And what was “to sell”? We added something to kaufen to get “to sell.”
   Student: Verkaufen.
   Teacher: Verkaufen. Good. “To sell”. How would you say “I’m buying it tomorrow”?
   Student: Ich kaufe es morgen.
   Teacher: Very good. Ich kaufe es morgen. And we saw that when something happens tends to
   come just before nicht. So, if you say something like “I’m not buying it tomorrow,” we get quite a
   different order than in English. “I’m buying it tomorrow not.”
   Student: Ich kaufe es morgen nicht.
   Teacher: Ich kaufe es morgen nicht. “I’m not buying it tomorrow.” So, we have morgen before
   nicht in its common position. So, this is the common position and I mention that it can be flexible
   on the context, maybe say Ich kaufe es nicht morgen, nicht morgen. “I’m not buying it tomorrow,
   I’m buying it on Tuesday.” No, so there we, we raise tomorrow from being just a detail to the
   detail. We can do this with the word order. And for the neutral “I’m not buying it tomorrow” when
   tomorrow is just a detail, not the detail, then you have the standard word order. Ich kaufe es morgen
   nicht. Morgen before nicht. “To send” is senden. Senden.
   Student: Senden.
   Teacher: So, again, we have the ‘s’ sounding like a ‘z.’ Senden.
   Student: Senden.
   Teacher: “They’re sending it. They’re sending it.”
   Student: Sie senden es.
   Teacher: Sie senden es. Good, “They’re not sending it.”
   Student: Sie senden es nicht.
   Teacher: Good. Sie senden es nicht. “They’re not sending it tomorrow.”
   Student: Sie senden es morgen nicht.
   Teacher: Very good. Sie senden es morgen nicht. The day after tomorrow is übermorgen.
   Übermorgen.
   Student: Übermorgen.
   Teacher: This literally mean “over” or “above tomorrow.”
   Student: Übermorgen.
   Teacher: Very good. So the u with the two dots, these two dots, in effect, and an e quality to the
   sound. We already saw that with spät which was spelled with the a with the two dots on it giving us
   a more e sound. How would you say “I’m coming the day after tomorrow”?
   Student: Ich komme übermorgen.
   Teacher: Good. Ich komme übermorgen. How would you say “They’re sending them tomorrow”?
   Student: Sie senden sie morgen.
   Teacher: Good. Sie senden sie morgen. “They’re not sending them tomorrow.”
   Student: Sie senden sie morgen nicht.
   Teacher: Very good. Sie senden sie morgen nicht. But, maybe, if you were to say “They’re not
   sending them tomorrow; they’re sending them the day after tomorrow.” Maybe, in this
   circumstance you will change that order of morgen nicht because you are emphasizing “not
   tomorrow,” “the day after tomorrow.” So, here you can witness the order being flexible. You can
   observe this knowing the general position and safe position for the time expression is before nicht,
   and also play with it yourself to give a different emphasis to your sentences. So, lets try this.
   “They’re not sending them tomorrow. They’re sending them the day after tomorrow.” So, the first
   bit: “They’re not sending them tomorrow.”
   Student: Sie senden sie morgen nicht.
   Teacher: Good, this would be the standard order, but as you will then contrast “They’re sending
   them the day after tomorrow.” You might want to change that order. You might want to say,
   “They’re sending them NOT tomorrow.”
   Student: Sie senden sie nicht morgen.
   Teacher: “They’re sending them the day after tomorrow.”
   Student: Sie senden sie übermorgen.
   Teacher: Very good. Sie senden sie nicht morgen. So, you can feel the emphasis shift there.
   “They’re sending them not tomorrow, they sending them the day after tomorrow.” Sie senden sie
   übermorgen. Good. So, your general and safe position is to have that time expression before the
   nicht. But, I don’t want anybody to hear it in another place and think that they misunderstood
   something about the rules of German. So, if you hear it in another place, it’s moved for emphasis.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: Teacher: German has reputation of being quite a difficult language. But, I think that’s mainly
   because it’s been understood and taught quite badly. Once we understand the value system of
   German, it becomes quite simple and transparent as a language. But, what do I mean by value
   system? Languages have different things that they care about, and things that they don’t. This we
   can call the value system of the language, what the language cares about and shows in it’s structure
   and grammar and vocabulary. Some languages change to mark certain things that other languages
   simply ignore. German, from the perspective of rules and exceptions, can look very complicated.
   From the perspective of its value system, it becomes very simple and transparent. The structure of
   German appears to be very much geared around preventing assumptions. We don’t want the
   listener to assume they know what we are going to say. And in the same way, we hold off
   interruptions that might stem from these presumptions. What’s more is that German identifies
   situations in which you may be more vulnerable to interruption, and takes steps to avoid the
   occurring{sic} by saving the most important information, the most key information until last. So,
   German seems to identify weak points, where people might assume what you are saying, and
   interrupt you. Understood or imagined in this lens, we can understand the driving force behind
   German, and understand why we end up with certain word orders. One such time when we might be
   vulnerable to presumption and therefore interruption is when we use more than one verb. For
   example, in “I want to see you tomorrow.” We open with a verb, “I want.” We shovel everything
   else in the middle: “you,” “tomorrow,” and then we close with the other verb, “to see.” Verbs are
   words we can put “to” in front of. “to buy” “to want” So, what we say in German is “I want you
   tomorrow to see” So, German identifies these occasions when we use two or more verbs, as an
   occasion where we might be developing a bigger idea, and also at the same time be vulnerable to
   interruption. Interruptions, which are usually the result of presumptions. Usually, when we
   interrupt somebody, it’s because we presume we know what they are going to say. Often, we’re
   wrong, and we interrupt that idea and the construction of the idea. German acts to avoid this. So,
   when we have a sentence with two verbs, for example. We can avoid this occurring by saving that
   last verb until right at the end of the structure. Now, you might not realize the impact of this when
   you’re building a sentence, because when you are building a sentence you already know the idea
   you are transmitting. But, when you are hearing the sentence of somebody else, you really realize
   that until you get to the last word you have no idea whats going on. You must hear all the details
   before you complete the picture. This avoids interruption, unless you are very sure what’s coming.
   So, what a different resource German offers us then, to communicate and piece together the
   information we share! This is to be enjoyed, and not dreaded. And it’s really fun during speaking,
   too. You know what you are saying; you know what is the idea that you want to communicate, and
   you can watch it peace together in the other person that will not understand what you are saying
   until you put that last verb on the end. Language isn’t thought. We are often asked, “Oh, what
   language do you think in?”, if you speak more than one language. No, this is a very common
   misconception. Language is a tool that we use in thought. But, actually, thought is something we
   transcribe to language. So, when we say something like “I don’t want to wait here very long
   today”, we transcribe that thought in that linear way in English. But, in English when we say “I
   don’t want to stay,” there we know whats going on, and those details then modify that reaction that
   occurs already on the end of “I don’t want to stay”, then we modify that reaction “very long here
   today,” whatever. But in German, we deconstruct and reconstruct that thought for the other person
   in a completely different way. “I don’t want,” all of the other information, then comes “here very
   long today” et cetera and then “to stay” on the end, completing the picture. So, let’s play with this.
   What was “to buy” again?
   Student: Kaufen.
   Teacher: Kaufen. So, starting with the simplest structures, if you were to say “I want to buy it,”
   you have two verbs there: “I want” and then “to buy.” These are the verbs. So, we start with the
   verb, the first verb, which is “I want.”
   Student: Ich will.
   Teacher: Ich will. And then we have, “to buy it,” but we must finish with that “to buy,” So, where
   does that “it” go?
   Student: Ich will es kaufen.
   Teacher: Bravo. Ich will es kaufen. Note: “I want it to buy,” huh, not the meaning in English, “I
   want it to buy,” “I want him to buy something.” No, “I want to buy it” “I want it” and we don’t
   complete the picture until we get to the end, “to buy.” “I want to buy it.” Ich will es kaufen. “I want
   to buy it tomorrow.” Again, you will have the second verb on the end. We’re not going to
   understand anything about what you are talking about until we get to the end. “I want to buy it
   tomorrow.”
   Student: Ich will kaufen es
   Teacher: We’re not going to understand anything about what you are saying until we get to the
   end. So, you start with one verb, you shovel everything else in the middle, in the order that we’ve
   been learning until now, and then you finish with the last verb.
   Student: Ich will es morgen kaufen.
   Teacher: Ich will es morgen kaufen.
   Student: Mmhm.
   Teacher: So, really, as a listener, I have no idea about what idea you are deciphering for me until I
   get to the end. Ich will es morgen “I want it tomorrow,” “to buy” and then I understand what’s
   going on. That means I won’t interrupt you, unless I’m very, very sure on what you will say. We
   will explore this idea, of this supposed value of German, of leaving the picture very incomplete
   until the end to avoid interruptions, to avoid presumptions about what one is saying, leaving the key
   piece of information that is necessary to contextualize everything else until the end of the clause.
   We will keep coming back to this idea of avoiding interruptions and assumptions throughout this
   entire course when we look at other adjustments that are made to the structure of German, which
   always seem to be identifying times in which we are vulnerable to this possible interruption and
   assumption and trying to save us from that peril.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: Teacher: So, we’ve begun to explore the character of German in a profound way, understanding
   how German identifies situations where we might be vulnerable to interruption or assumption, and
   German takes steps to avoid it. For example, when we use two verbs, we have the second verb,
   which holds the most key information, at the end. “I don’t want to buy it tomorrow,” “I want it
   tomorrow not to buy.” So, we see the order of the words between these two verbs is the same as
   what we’ve been seeing until now. We begin with our first verb, and then any small words like es or
   mich, the time expression before nicht and the second verb on the end. So, how would you say “I
   don’t want to buy it tomorrow”? Where will you begin?
   Student: Ich will es mor.., mmm, morgen nicht kaufen.
   Teacher: Bravo. Ich will es morgen nicht kaufen. And you can feel your mind, no?, processing that
   idea in a different way. You think of the second verb sooner, and then you have to forget it until you
   get to the end. So you think “oh, to buy. OK, I won’t worry about that until I get to the end.” Don’t
   worry about finding “to buy” yet. Don’t worry about working out that “to buy” is kaufen because
   you will have to hold on to that if you work that out now whilst you’re putting in your es morgen
   nicht. You only want to think about the bit that is in front of you. This will be a very simple way to
   work your way through German. So, you say “I want,” Ich will “to buy, oh no that will go at the
   end. Don’t have to think about that yet,” and you don’t. You think about the things that will come in
   the middle. So, OK, first we have words like es, then we have the time expression-morgen, then we
   have nicht, and then we put on our kaufen. So, we start experiencing a very different architecture in
   German. How would you say, “I can’t send it tomorrow”? So, it might feel like a very complicated
   sentence to decipher all at once. you worry about what will come first and what will come next, and
   all of your concentration just on that. “I can’t send it tomorrow.”
   Student: Ich kann nicht -no- Ich kann es morgen nicht senden.
   Teacher: Very good. Very good. Ich kann es morgen nicht senden. Ich kann nicht is a very natural
   place to start from for an English speaker, and English speakers will have to be careful of this
   because, of course, we have “I can’t,” so we want to say Ich kann nicht but of course be have Ich
   kann and before nicht, es, the time expression-morgen, then nicht and then the final verb- senden.
   So, again, if I’m listening to you, I don’t know what you’re talking about until you complete that
   idea. “I can it tomorrow not” and then we complete the picture - “send.” Ich kann es morgen nicht
   senden. We saw how spät is late and später is later, so how would you say “I can’t buy it later”? “I
   can’t buy it later.”
   Student: What’s buy? I forget.
   Teacher: Don’t worry about that, yet. That’s actually the last thing you need to think about. If you
   think about it now...
   Student: Mmm. Then I..
   Teacher: ...you will be trying to hold on to that, and that will really affect your mental processing
   for the rest. So you go...
   Student: Mm.
   Teacher: ...“ok to buy,” that’s at the end.
   Student: Mmhm.
   Teacher: “I can’t buy it later.”
   Student: Ich kann es später nicht kaufen.
   Teacher: Ich kann es später nicht kaufen. And then you remembered kaufen very easily. You
   didn’t have to think about it. No? But if you start worrying about what you know, what you don’t at
   the beginning, then we start to get shut-downs in the mind. Stress, no, which really inhibits our
   finding process. “to stay” is bleiben. B L E I B E N. Bleiben.
   Student: Bleiben
   Teacher: So this e-i gives us [aɪ] sound, we actually also had it in einschlafen to fall asleep, to in sleep. That
   ein of einschlafen is spelled E I N. So again we have here EI giving us [aɪ]. Bleiben.
   Student: Bleiben.
   Teacher: And that’s “to stay.” the word for “here” in German is hier
   Student: Hier
   Teacher: And this is spelled H I E R. So, IE gives is [iː], where EI gives us [aɪ]. Now, we don’t
   want to memorize that. We just want to know there are words we can look back to, to check which
   one’s which. So we can look back to Sie, which is spelled S I E, “they” or “you” to die, “the,”
   which is spelled D I E. We can look back to hier, H I E R, and that will remind us that the IE gives
   us this [iː], hier.
   Student: Hier.
   Teacher: “I can stay here.” How would you say that? “I can stay here”
   Student: Ich kann hier bleiben.
   Teacher: Good. Ich kann hier bleiben.
   How would you say “I can’t stay here tomorrow”? “I can’t stay here tomorrow.” So, just worry
   about the bit you need to get out first.
   Student: Ich kann morgen nicht hier bleiben.
   Teacher: Very good. Ich kann morgen nicht hier bleiben. Very good. Again, we see how in
   English we modify the reaction “I can’t stay here tomorrow,” and in German we construct the
   reaction. “I can tomorrow not here stay.” We only work out what’s going on once we have all of the
   other information. So, word order is a fascinating area in German. It gives a different pace and
   mechanism to both everyday conversation, as well as the art we make of language, such as poetry,
   song lyrics. These elements of German are not an obstacle to learning and speaking, but constitute a
   lot of what German has to offer you, a different way to process information, a different way to
   think, and a different way to make yourself understood when you’re expressing yourself in German.
   Something to be thoroughly enjoyed and investigated, rather than seen as a hurdle to
   communication because of its differences with English. Languages are mechanisms which both
   permit and oblige us to perceive and express the world in a certain way. They force us and they
   allow us to perceive the world and to express the world in a certain way. Learning a new language
   that does this differently can be a life changing experience.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: Teacher: The word for “now” in German is “Jetzt” “Jetzt”
   Student: Jetzt
   Teacher: So it's like the English word yet with an st, an extra st. So if this is complicated to pronounce,
   you can think of the English word yet, and then, after you think of that, add on the st, “Jetzt”.
   Student: Jetzt
   Teacher: Good. And of course these words are related, no? The German word Jetzt is related to the
   English word yet, but in German Jetzt means now, Jetzt.
   Student: Jetzt
   Teacher: Good, you can think first of yet then add your st. because this is a kind of complicated word. I
   should also mention that this je sound is spelled with a j in German. Like the German word for yes
   “Ja” spelled j a. How would you say “they want it”. ?
   Student: Sie wollen es
   Teacher: Sie wollen es, good. And this could also contract to Sie wollen's. You can contract wollen and es
   to wollen's, sie wollen's. Do they want it?
   Student: Wollen sie es?
   Teacher: Very good! Wollen sie es, and this you could also contract to wollen sie's. So the sie and the es
   can contract to sie's. Wollen sie's.
   Student: Wollen sie's
   Teacher: Good. They want it now!?
   Student: Sie wollen's jetzt.
   Teacher: Very good. Sie wollen es jetzt or sie wollen's jetzt. What do they want now?
   Student: Was wollen sie jetzt.
   Teacher: Very good. Was wollen sie jetzt. What do they want to eat now? What was to eat?
   Student: Essen
   Teacher: Essen, good. So let's begin with what do they want.
   Student: Was wollen sie essen jetzt.
   Teacher: We have two verbs here, no?
   Student: Ahh,ok. Was wollen sie jetzt essen.
   Teacher: Very good. Was wollen sie jetzt essen. Good. So part of this is being very clear on what verbs
   are, no? And spotting when you are using two of them. Then you know that you need to make your
   sandwitch, opening with the verb, shoving everything else there in the middle and then closing with
   the verb. So here we have was wollen sie, what do they want, to eat now. And we recognise with
   that to eat that we have a second verb so that will close the sentence and the now is going to go in
   the middle. Was wollen sie jetzt essen. It's easy to identify verbs by their form. To words and those
   that come from them. So to go, to come, to eat and words that come from them like eat, comes,
   came. A couple of verbs in English don't have two forms. There is no to can for example but can is
   a verb. But we don't have any to can. Instead we use to be able, but that's a rarity of English. That's
   an English problem. In German we do have to can. The same with must. In English we have I must,
   you must, we must, but not to must. Instead we use to have to. But in German we do have a to must.
   So to can or to be able, in English, is können.
   Student: Können
   Teacher: Könne. This is spelt k o and the o has two dots on the top, n n e n. The vowel here, in können, is
   like the vowel in bird. So it might be confusing to think of it as an o because there is not much of an
   o sound here. So what we can do, we can look at the word bird, in English, and just import that
   sound over. Bird, kö, können.
   Student: Können
   Teacher: Können. so this is the o plust the umlaut giving us this ö sound as in bird. They can?
   Student: Sie können.
   Teacher: Sie können. The children can?
   Student: Kinder
   Teacher: Good, and the children was? If you don't remember the word for the, maybe you can look at the
   English word for the or the and see what happens to th in German.
   Student: Die Kinder?
   Teacher: Die Kinder, good.
   Student: Die Kinder können.
   Teacher: Könne, good. And the r in Kinder is not really pronounced. It's more like the English. Late, later,
   Kinder.
   Student: Kinder
   Teacher: And of course, die Kinder is like they, so we are again keeping the true form of the verb. Die
   Kinder können. The children can. We can?
   Student: Wir können?
   Teacher: Wir können.
   Student: Wir können.
   Teacher: Good. Again, the r, we're not really hearing it like wir, we have w i r but the r on the end of the
   word there is like in English, like in car.
   Student: Wir können.
   Teacher: Good, wir. What was to buy?
   Student: Verkaufen
   Teacher: Verkaufen is to sell. We added that ver to get sell from buy.
   Student: Kaufen.
   Teacher: Kaufen, good. Can we buy it now?
   Student: There are two verbs.
   Teacher: Tell me, which are the two verbs?
   Student: Can and buy.
   Teacher: Can and buy, good. So, that's half the work. Identifying where you have that situation of two
   verbs and now you know what you must do. So can we buy it now?
   Student: Können wir es jetzt kaufen?
   Teacher: Very well done. Können wir es jetzt kaufen. Very good. What was to stay?
   Student: Bleiben.
   Teacher: Bleiben, good. And the word for here? It's the same.
   Student: Bleiben.
   Teacher: No, the same as English.
   (Laughter)
   Student: Hier.
   Teacher: Hier, good. The same as in English but spelt h i e r. Ie in German gives us ee, like a long ee, like
   in die, the word for the, spelt d i e. And ei gives us i as in bleiben which is b l e i b e n. So ei gives
   us i and ie gives us ee, as in hier, bier also, like the drink, also spelt b i e r in German. What was I
   can?
   Student: Ich kann.
   Teacher: Ich kann, soft ich, ich kann. And we see actually how kann is irregular, no? It's not ich könne
   from können. It's ich kann. So that's irregular just as ich will from wollen was irregular. How would
   you say: I can't stay here now? I can't stay here now?
   Student: I don't remember where nicht goes.
   Teacher: So ok, start with the first bit that you are sure of that you can get out of the way. That's really
   helpful. So what's the first bit?
   Student: Ich kann nicht
   Teacher: You're sure of ich kann. You're not sure about the nicht, right?
   Student: Ok so ich kann
   Teacher: Good, let's frees up some mental space to think about the rest, no? So what comes first? What
   type of word comes first?
   Student: Now
   Teacher: Good, the time expression. So ich kann jetzt then what comes?
   Student: Nicht
   Teacher: Nicht. So we have time expressions coming before nicht. So you want to give that a try all
   together. I can't stay here now.
   Student: Ich kann jetzt nicht hier bleiben.
   Teacher: Very good. Very good. Well done. And you notice how the listener here has no idea what's going
   on until they get to the end. Ich kann jetzt nicht hier what? Bleiben. And then you know what's
   going on.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: Teacher: What was the word for “here” in German?
   Student: Hier.
   Teacher: Hier. The word for there is da. Da, spelled D-A.
   Student: Da.
   Teacher: Of course, we see the T-H to D shift again. English T-H in “there” to German D in da.
   How would you say, “I can stay there tomorrow”? “I can stay there tomorrow.”
   Student: Ich kann da... O.K. Ich kann morgen da bleiben.
   Teacher: Good. Ich kann morgen da bleiben. So we need to think about the order of these words,
   no? We have the when first, if we have a nicht, it’s gonna come afterward, and then we have the
   where. Here we don’t have any nicht. So, we have Ich kann morgen da bleiben. “I can stay there
   tomorrow.” dableiben, also means to stay put. So, depending on the context, Ich kann morgen da
   bleiben, might mean “I can stay there tomorrow” or “I can stay put tomorrow.” So, that might be
   ambiguous but you can understand the difference by the context. Another “to” form that we have in
   German, that we don’t have in English, is “to must.” We mentioned that in German we have “to
   can, we have “to must,” and we don’t have these verbs in English. In English, we get around having
   no “to must” by using “to have,” “to have to,” which of course is closer t o the meaning of muss in
   German. We said that ich muss is much more like “I have to” than “I must.” So, how would you
   say, “I don’t have to go now”? Literally, “I mustn’t go now” in German.
   Student: Ich muss jetzt nicht gehen.
   Teacher: Very good. Ich muss jetzt nicht gehen. So, in German we have müssen. Müssen.
   Student: Müssen.
   Teacher: This is written M-U, and u with the umlaut, the two little dots above the U, S-S-E-N.
   Now, this double S, makes the [Y]-sound shorter. Müssen.
   Student: Müssen
   Teacher: Good. So, ich muss doesn’t have these two dots above the u. It’s irregular, just how we
   saw Ich kann was irregular and ich will was irregular. Ich muss is also irregular, the “to”-form also
   has two dots over the u. Müssen. Müssen.
   Student: Müssen
   Teacher: How would you say “We must”?
   Student: Wir müssen.
   Teacher: Wir müssen. Good. How would you say “Must We”? “Do we have to”?
   Student: Müssen wir?
   Teacher: Good. Müssen wir? There’s also quite a few verbs in German of Latin origin, that end I-
   E-R-E-N. Now, this IEREN ending, which will show you that the verb came in from Latin, is
   pronounced like [iən] mostly. It’s contracted in spoken{SIC}, and the pronunciation you get is
   [iən]. So, you don’t really hear the R there. For example, “organize” becomes organisieren.
   Student: Organisieren.
   Teacher: How would you say “Must we organize it now”? “Must we organize it now”?
   Student: Müssen wir es jetzt organisieren.
   Teacher: Very good. Very good. Müssen wir es jetzt organisieren. Very good. “to study” is
   studieren. Studieren.
   Student: Studieren.
   Teacher: We have the ST of study, giving us [ʃtə] in German. Studieren
   Student: Studieren
   Teacher: “Must we study”? “Do we have to study”?
   Student: Müssen wir studieren?
   Teacher: Müssen wir studieren? “Must we study now?”
   Student: Müssen wir jetzt studieren?
   Teacher: Very good. Müssen wir jetzt studieren? To give you more words of Latin origin that you
   might hear around, you can guess their meaning: adoptieren
   Student: “To adopt.”
   Teacher: “Adopt,” of course. aktivieren
   Student: “To activate.”
   Teacher: “Activate.” Argumentieren.
   Student: “To argue. Argument.”
   Teacher: Yes, exactly, it’s not like “argue,” but it’s not “argument,” because this is a noun in
   English. No, we don’t really have “to argument,” but the meaning is exactly that. It’s to put
   forward an argument, rather than “to argue.” Very good. Boykottieren
   Student: “To boycott.”
   Teacher: “To boycott.” Autorisieren. Attackieren. Definieren. Demolieren. Can you work that one
   out? Demol--
   Student: “Demolish.”
   Teacher: “Demolish.” From Italian, you get this one, no? It’s more obvious. Deportieren.
   Student: “To deport.”
   Teacher: Funktionieren.
   Student: “To function”
   Teacher: “To function” or “to work” not to say that “something works.” So, quite a few, you will
   hear around: informieren, interessieren, kopieren, normalisieren. et cetera, et cetera, so keep an eye
   out for those, and of course there will be many of these words you want to use, that you won’t
   realize that they exist in German ‘till you give it a try. So, maybe one time you want to use the
   word, “exist,” and you decided you’re going to give it a try in German, and see what happens, what
   would you do?
   Student: Existieren.
   Teacher: Existieren. And, you will be right. Existieren. A Latin C sound, like a C making an S
   sound, like in accept, or reduce often become a Z in German. For example, in “reduce,” it’s a Latin
   C giving us an S sound in English, and this will become a Z in German. And Z in German, are
   pronounced T-S.. T-S. That’s the pronunciation of a Z sound in German. So, knowing that, how
   you will say “Reduce”?
   Student: Reduz.
   Teacher: And how..what’s the verb ending?
   Student: Ahh..Reduzieren.
   Teacher: Good. Reduzieren. “Accept” Accept has two C’s, the first one becomes a K; the second
   C, that sounds like an S, “Accept” becomes a Z. So, in German, this is A-K-Z
   Student: [ɛ]kzeptieren.
   Teacher: [æ]kzeptieren
   Student: Akzeptieren
   Teacher: Akzeptieren. Good. “I must.”
   Student: Ich musse.
   Teacher: But, it’s irregular, no? It’s not coming directly from müssen, it’s slightly irregular.
   Student: Ich muss.
   Teacher: Ich muss. Ah, we have a normal U. Ich muss. So, that’s slightly irregular. And then, we
   have “You must(speaking formally),” “You (plural) must,” “They must.”
   Student: Sie müssen
   Teacher: Sie müssen. There we have the U with the two dots on the top giving it that E quality,
   no? Müssen. “They must copy it there. They must copy it there.””
   Student: Sie müssen es da kopie.
   Teacher: It’s “to copy” now, no?
   Student: Kopieren.
   Teacher: Ah, I didn’t hear the N on the end. So, it didn’t sound like “to copy.” It’s very important
   to hear that N. The R is getting swallowed up there? No? But, the N is important. Sie müssen es da
   kopieren. So, the word for “we” is...
   Student: Wir.
   Teacher: Wir. The word for “us” is uns. Uns.
   Student: Uns.
   Teacher: Spelled U-N-S. Uns. How would you say, “They must inform us.” So, “inform” is a
   Latin verb.
   Student: Informieren.
   Teacher: Informieren. So, “They must inform us.”
   Student: Sie müssen uns informieren.
   Teacher: Very good. Sie müssen uns informieren. “They don’t interest us.” How[SIC] do you
   think is “to interest”?
   Student: Intere[t]sieren
   Teacher: Interessieren. The T here become an S.
   Student: Interessieren.
   Teacher: So, “They interest us not. They don’t interest us.”
   Student: Sie interessieren uns nicht.
   Teacher: Exactly. Sie interessieren uns nicht. And, again, soft nicht. -icht.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: What was to stay
Student: Bleib
Teacher: Bleiben
Student: I stay?
Teacher: Ich bleib
Student: Ich bleibe
Teacher: And In spoken German ich leib is very common in spoken german it is very common to lose the last e. Now
   eventhough in written german you will read ich bleibe. This is different from the loss of the e that we find in
   ich kann ich will ich muss These verbs are written without that e. And they are other changes as well.
   Konnen to kann mussen to muss wollen to will so those were irregular, but pretty much all verbs that you
   put in the I form can be pronounced without the last e sound Ich bleibe Ich bleib. I’m coming?
Student: Ich komm
Teacher: Ich Komm..ich komme.. you can hear either . no? I’m coming tomorrow?
Student: Ich komm morgen
Teacher: Ich komm morgen.. And I’m not coming tomorrow
Student: Ich komm morgen nicht
Teacher: .. Morgen the time, the when before the nicht. So we’ve seen two versions of the verb actually.That’s what
   we’ve seen so far. We’ve seen the to form. Bleiben kommen which we can use for a lot, for ‘they’ ‘you
   formal’ ‘you plural’ for wie sie bleiben wir bleiben sie kommen sie kommen.We’ve seen the I form bleibe
   ichbleib komme ich komm.Wealso have in german an informal you, which the one which youll want to use
   while practicing german with your friend.e.: you might have heard the sentence where fr art thou Romeo.
   Do you know what it means? Where for art thou romeo.. ?
Student: Where are you Romeo?
Teacher: Thats what you think. That’s whatmost people assume. Where are you romeo, but then it doesn’t mean
   where for but it means why. Why are you Romeo? Which iif you know the storyof Rome and julietteis two
   young people fell in love on two wolling families, why she is asking why re you Romeo.Why is that
   your name? why are you from the other family? Thou is the English word for you and thus you can
   imagine, shes probably been talking toromeo informally. In german, the informal version isdu
Student: du
Teacher: What do we see between thou and du
Student: Th became d
Teacher: Th became d, exactly. Thou…du…So this thou in old English, if you ever read shkespeare in Engish,or
   example the old bible in englsh or you will come across these form thou and in german that is du. Th to d
   shift. Also if u had any exporure to old English, you might be familiar with thou goehst. Weder goehst thou?
   Where do you go? So we have goehst in old English, we have same in german. Du gehst. We have an st
   ending for thou. We use du for the informal you and by changing the ending to an st after rewe remove the
   ending
Student: For example, to go is
Teacher: Gehen
Student: Gehen…if we remove out en and put an st. how is that gonna sound?
Teacher: Du gehst
Student: Du gehst. Good.
Teacher: What was to study?
Student: Studen
Teacher: What do you add at the end?
   Studieren
Student: you study speaking informally
Teacher: Du studerst…Du studierst
Student: Very good. Du studierst
Teacher: What do you study?
Student: Was studierst du?
Teacher: Very good
Student: Whats was to understand
Teacher: Verstehen
Student: Verstehen. You understand, speaking informally
Teacher: Du verstandest
Student: Slowly , you cannot go from verstehen to verstandest if you are not rushing
Teacher: Du verstehest
Student: Du verstehest
Teacher: Du verstehest
Student: Good and the e is coming little bit at the back as you can see, my mouth that im pulling that right back.
   verstehest
Teacher: Do you understand me?
Student: Verstand..no?
Teacher: You must be sure of what is du form of the verb before you start manipulating it, if you have any insecurity
   there then of course then you are taking something insecure and then you are changing into very unikely to
   get it right.no? Verstehen
Student: verstehen
Teacher: Give me first, do you understand
Student: Verstehst du?
Teacher: Versthest du?
Student: Do You understand me?
Teacher: Verstehst du mich?
Student: Good. Don’t you understand me?Don’t you understand me?
Teacher: Versteghest du mich nicht
Student: Very good.. Verstehest du mich nicht
Teacher: Tel me again the word for not
Student: Nicht
   To say anything or nothing, anything or not we just had an s
Teacher: Nichts nichts
Student: nichts
Teacher: Its bit of a mouth full ch and s all together. Nichts. You can think of nicht first and then add s.Nichts
Student: Nichts
Teacher: In the same way we thought about the word jetzt of the word now and then we added the zt to help us
   pronounce it. Either way you will hear in colloquial german , nix. Like nix, and you will also see if you’re
   looking around for adverbs etc.
Student: How do you say ‘you understand nothing’
Teacher: Du verstehest nichts [nix]
Student: Du verstehest nichts or nix
Teacher: Don’t you understand naything?lit. you understand nothing
Student: Verstehest du nichts [nix]
Teacher: nichts or nix ..good
Student: I want to eat
Teacher: Er wll essen
Student: Ich will essen
Teacher: I don’t want to eat
Student: Ich will nicht essen
Teacher: Ich will nicht essen
Student: How do you say Idont want to eat anything.
Teacher: Ich will nict nichts essen
Student: So we don’t put
Teacher: Nicht and nichts
Student: Yes, we would say,I want nothing to eat
Teacher: Ich will nichts essen or ich will nixessen
Student: So we have I want
Teacher: Ich will
Student: Ich will
Teacher: What is to want
Student: Wollen
Teacher: Wollen. You want, the informal you, du willst
   Du willst
Student: So it’s a bit irregular, we are not going from wollen, it’s not du wollst. We are going from will, ich will. We
   are keeping that irregularity. Du willst.
Teacher: Du willst
Student: Do you want?
Teacher: Willst du?
Student: Do you want to eat?
Teacher: Willst du essen?
Student: Willst du essen?
Teacher: Don’t you want to eat anything? So this is just you want to eat nothing, in german. Don’t u want to eat
   anything?
Student: Willst du nichts essen?
Teacher: What was I can
Student: Ich kann
Teacher: And to can and to be able in english
Student: Konnen
Teacher: Konnen
Student: Think about bo and import that sound over when I say import that sound over, when u have bo ko. Konnen.
Teacher: Konnen.
Student: Du kannst not du kinnst
Teacher: Du kannst
Student: Again we are taking the irregularity of ich kann
Teacher: And not du konnst,
Student: Can you help?
Teacher: Du kannst helfen?
Student: Kannst du helfen?
Teacher: Cant you help?
Student: Kannst du nicht helfen?
Teacher: Good, and I like how you thought if anything was going to come before, and that’s what you need to do,
   the slower we think about it, the more time we take to think about word orders and where things should
   go, the more it becomes second nature, the more we are installing the structure of german in our minds
   after which we don’t really need to think about it.
Student: What was to see?
   Sehe
Teacher: “to see”?
Student: Sehen.
Teacher: Sehen. It must end in “en” if it is with “to”. It’s a “to” word.
Student: Can you see it?
Teacher: Kannst du es sehen?
Student: Good kannst du es sehen. And the Du and es can contract?
Teacher: Kannst du’s sehen
Student: Kannst du’s sehen.
Teacher: Very good.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: To do or to make is machen. Machen…
Student: Machen.
Teacher: That’s pelt M-a-c-h-e-n. Here we have friction on the ch. Machen.
Student: Machen.
Teacher: So, Its only soft when we have an I before it, like ich , mich , nicht or if we have an e before it. Like in for
   example, brechen, which is to break, brechen. So we are actually seeing another pattern here. This isEnglish
   k to German ch. Make – Machen, Break – brechen, to speak – sprechen.
Student: Sprechen
Teacher: Good, so when we have a ch with and I oran e before it’s soft. Another vowel before it ishard with friction.
   Like inmachen. How would you say I’m making it?
Student: Ich mache es.
Teacher: Ich mache es. Or with the contraction ich mach’s
Student: Ich mach’s
Teacher: Good. So we could add Ich mache, Ich mach for I make or I’m making. How would you say you make,
   speaking formally?
Student: Sie machen
Teacher: Sie machen. How do you say “you make” speaking informally using “du”
Student: Du machst
Teacher: Du machst. Good. What are you doing?
Student: Was machst du?
Teacher: Was machst du? This can mean what are you doing or also what do you do, like, as a job, for example: Wha
   do you do? Was machst du? Are you going to do it tomorrow? Will you do it tomorrow? Are you doing it
   tomorrow?
Student: MAchst du es morgen?
Teacher: MAchst du es morgen? Are you going to do it tomorrow? Will you do it tomorrow? And the du and the es,
   they can contract. Machst du es morgen? So the du and the es can contract to du’s . Machst du’s morgen.
   What are you doing there?
Student: Was machst du da?
Teacher: Was machst du da? What was “I want”?
Student: Ich will
Teacher: Ich will. And “you want” informally?
Student: Du willst
Teacher: Du willst. Very good. Slightly irregular. We have will and willst. I can?
Student: Ich kann.
Teacher: Ich kann.
Student: Ich kann.
Teacher: Much better. “You can” informally?
Student: Du kannst.
Teacher: Du kannst. What was “to must/ to have to”?
Student: Mussen
Teacher: Mussen. “I must?”
Student: Ich muss.
Teacher: Ich muss. So slightl different. We are not keeping the vowel with the dots. We have a vowel without the
   dots. Ich muss. You must keep the irregularity in the same way as we saw with Ich will, du willst, Ich kann,
   du kannst, Ich muss…
Student: Du musst
Teacher: Good, Du must, Du must, good. So that’s also irregular.It’s more certain the irregularity, no? Its just a
   difference between vowel and the two dots and the vowel without two dots. We see the same irregularity
   happening; Ich kann, du kannst; Ich will, Du willst; Ich muss, du must; How do you say you have to do it?
Student: Du musst es machen.
Teacher: Good. Du must es machen. Or you can also contract that must and that s is little bit complicated to think
   out mussts, but it can happen. Du mussts machen. Du mussts machen. Du must es machen. The word for
   soon is “bald”. “bald” – “soon”.
Student: Bald.
Teacher: That means soon, “bald”. You have to do it soon.
Student: Du must es bald machen.
Teacher: Very good. Du musst es or du musst’s. If we contract the es and the must, bald machen. Du must es bald
   machen. Du musst’s bald machen. Good… So we notice that the verbs that are irregular for “I”, keeping this
   irregularity for “du” as well. Ich will – du willst; Ichkann – du kannst; Ich muss- du must; But generally we
   were given the “to” form of the verb, removing the –en and adding our –st, to get our informal you. “To
   organize” is:
Student: Organisien
Teacher: And you organize?
Student: Du organisiest
Teacher: Organsiest. To sing?
Student: Singen
Teacher: Singen, good…er… Z sound for that S. Singen spelt S-I-N-G-E-N. But the S we pronounce as Z. Singen. “You
   sing”?
Student: Du singst.
Teacher: Du singst. Do you sing?
Student: Singst du?
Teacher: “Singst du?”. To accept was speltlike akz- at the beginning. “Z” in german we pronounce as “ts” so the
   beginning of the word might be a bit challenging.
Student: Akzept… ah no. Ak-Zeptieren
Teacher: Akzeptieren. Do you accept it?
Student: Akz-z…
Teacher: So you must do it slowly, so when you have challenging word like this, it’s a very nice experience for having
   to slow yourself right down to get your head around it.
Student: Ak-zeptest…
Teacher: So when you come across that point of insecurity, please go back to the “du” form. Be very sure of what is
   “du” form.
Student: Akzeptierst…
Teacher: Very good. Akzeptierst dus? Is the contraction or Akzeptierst du es? Very good.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: So what was the word we learnt for “you”, the informal you
Student: “Du”
Teacher: “Du”. And we saw this was the “th” to ‘d’ pattern as in old English thou and then German du. Thou is spelt
   T-H-O-U and du is pronounced D-U and this O-U to U is like another pattern you wil come across. Many
   words that have O-U in them in English, have just U in them in German. For example: Course in german is
   Kurs, K-U-R-S
Student: Kurs
Teacher: The word for soon is bald
Student: Bald
Teacher: Bald is spelt B-A-L-D. The D at the end of the syllable in German is pronounced more like a T. So B-A-L –D
   but what we here is BAL-T, if we think about it the T is just a hard version of the D, very similar sounds “D”
   and “T”. So we can say that the “T” becomes hard at the end of the syllable BALD
Student: “Bald”
Teacher: In the same way, the word for “mouth” in German is “Mund”. This is spelt M-U-N-D. So what is happening
   how do we get from mouth to mund?
Student: OU become U and TH become D
Teacher: Exactly, we have two shifts happening there, no? OU to U and TH to D, but T being at the end of the syllable
   is being pronounced hard, “Mund” - “Mouth”
Student: “Mund”
Teacher: How do you think you might say “Ground”?
Student: “Grund”
Teacher: Grund. Good. G-R-U-N-D and that ‘D’ pronounced like a ‘T’. “GRUND”. Round?
Student: “Rund”
Teacher: Rund. Its end with soon
Student: Bald
Teacher: B-A-L-D “bald”. Very good. “A Course” is “ein Kurs”.
Student: Ein Kurs.
Teacher: “A mouth” is “Ein Mund”
Student: Ein Mund
Teacher: This is coming from “eins” which means “one”. Number one is eins, then we have “ein” for “a” and if we
   think about it “ein” literally means “one”, no? “A mouth” is “one mouth” – “ein Mund”. Blouse is Bluse.
Student: Bluse.
Teacher: Bluse. Now, “a blouse” is “eine Bluse”.
Student: Eine Bluse.
Teacher: Eine Bluse. So we have “ein” and “eine”, “eine” we use for feminine nouns. Bluse is feminine in german,
   “eine Bluse”. Many feminine words look like this word “a” – “eine”. Now, how do they look like each other?
   Eine has the accent just before the “e” on the end. Eine has the final e and the accent just before it. Eine.
   We can find other words that have the final e and the accent just before and many ofthose will be
   feminine. We see already “Meine Bluse”, how do you think you would say “Wound”? If I tell you that
   “Wound” is feminine in German.
Student: “Eine Wunde”
Teacher: Good, but what will you do with that W.
Student: Eine Wunde.
Teacher: Good. Eine Wunde, good. “A wound”. A soup is ”eine Suppe”. We have an ‘S’, we know it give a ‘Z’ sound,
   we have 2 ‘P’s here, making that ‘U’ shorter. Eine Suppe.
Student: Eine Suppe.
Teacher: Good. So we see that the feminine nouns, nouns which are feminine in German take “eine” for “a”, many of
   the feminine nouns look like “eine”, in that they have this, final ‘e’ on the end. “eine Wunde”, “eine Bluse”,
   “eine Suppe”, what was the word “to do” or “to make”?
Student: Machen
Teacher: Machen, good,TO cook? Take a guess.
Student: Kuchen.
Teacher: Kochen. Good. K-O-C-H-E-N. Kochen.
Student: Kochen. How would you say you have to cook a soup, you have to make a soup. You will say, you have to
   cook a soup. Let’s speak informally, so you have to…
Teacher: Du must eine Suppe kochen.
Student: Du must eine Suppe kochen. Very good. So for “a” so like”a course” we have…
Teacher: “ein”
Student: And for feminine words we have
Teacher: “eine”
Student: “eine”. “my” is “mein”. So we just put an ‘m’ before “ein”. “mein”
Teacher: “mein”
Student: “mein”.. So “mein” means “my”. Soein is spelt E-I-N. We know this E-I gives the “EI” sound and “mein” is
   spelt M-E-I-N. How do you say “my brother”?
Teacher: Mein Bruder.
Student: Mein Bruder.Mein Bruder.How do you think you would say “young ” in German?
Teacher: Jung.
Student: Jung. So we have the OU there, so it might just might be the same in German. Here it is, “young” – “jung”.
   How do you say “my brother is young”. What is the word for “is”?
Teacher: Ist.
Student: “My brother is young.”
Teacher: “Mein Bruder ist Jung”
Student: It’slike the English “NG” actually, so you don’t really hear “G” here, its more asal “jung”.
Teacher: Jung.
   Good. “Mein Bruder ist jung”. So what was “a blouse”
Student: “Eine Bluse”
Teacher: Very good. “eine” – “eine Bluse”, because this word is feminine. So “my blouse”?
Student: “Meine Bluse”
Teacher: Good, “eine Bluse” plus ‘m’ , “Meine Bluse”. Very good. Word for “where” is “wo”
Student: Wo
Teacher: That’s W-O, the word for “where”, just W-O “wo”
Student: . How do you say “Where is my blouse?”
Teacher: Wo ist meine Blouse- Bluse?
Student: Yes, Wo ist meine Bluse. “Where is my brother?”
Teacher: Wo…Wo ist mein Bruder?
Student: Good. Wo ist mein Bruder. Dein- dein means your. This is the informal you and of course we can realize this
   because we are taking the ‘d’ from “Du” “ein” plus our “d” from “Du” and we get dein. SO if you want to
   say “your brother”
Teacher: Dein Bruder
Student: Dein Bruder. “Is your brother young?” Again the word order doesn’t change between German and English
   here. Because in Englsih we have lso making the inversion for the question. The non-question would be
   “your brither is young” and then “Is you brother young?” is the way we make the question. So how would
   that be in German?
Teacher: “Ist dein Bruder jung?”
Student: “Ist dein Bruder jung?” Good. The word for “House ” in German is “Haus”
Teacher: “Haus”
Student: It’s not feminine so how would you say “my house”?
Teacher: Mein Haus“
Student: Mein Hhaus, your house?
Teacher: Dein Haus
Student: Dein Haus. Where is your haus?
Teacher: “Wo ist dein Haus?”
Student: Wo is dein Haus?So you’ve seen how we can identify by some feminine nouns by the fact that they have an
   ‘e’ on the end and the accent just before. Just like “eine”. Word for “Street” in German is”Strasse”
Teacher: Strasse
Student: Strasse, so we have “st” and that’s giving us “st” nd the second ‘s’ there is the ‘t’ to ‘s’ shift , like in it , essen
   , street, strasse, and the ‘e’ on the end of strasse is showing us that it’s feminine. So if you want to say a
   street.
   “Eine strasse”
Teacher: “Eine strasse”. “My street”?
Student: “Meine Strasse”.
Teacher: “Meine strasse”. “Your street”? Talking informally…
Student: “Deine Strasse”.
Teacher: “Where is your street”?
Student: “Wo ist deine Strasse?”
Teacher: “Wo ist deine Strasse?” Very good.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: “Haben” in German is “to have”, “haben”
Student: “Haben”
Teacher: “Haben”, How do you say “I have”
Student: “Ich habe”
Teacher: “Ich habe”, and with the contraction that we have said, you will very often hear in the spoken language.
Student: “Ich hab’
Teacher: “Ich hab”. Very good. “I have it”?
Student: “Ich hab’s”
Teacher: “Ich hab’s”, or without any contractiions?
Student: “Ich habe es”
Teacher: “Ich habe es”, very good. “I don’t have it?”
Student: “Ich habe es nicht”
Teacher: Very good. “Ich habe es nicht” or “hab’s nicht”. So we saw the word for “a”, or two words for “a”,,, what
   were those?
Student: “Ein, eine”
Teacher: “Ein” or “eine”, Good. You have “ein” and “eine”. In fact in German, nouns, words that can put “the” or “a”
   in front , so in school we mostly are told that nouns are things or objects. But that can get quite confusing.
   It’s much better for us to look at the form of nouns to understand what is a noun. Because if we are
   thinking as it is a thing, we might think of “peace”, “dream”, and have a problem understanding whether
   that’s a thing or not. For us, a noun is a word that you can put “a” or “the” in front of. “The peace”, “The
   dream”, ok that works, so they’re nouns. Nouns in German can be masculine, feminine or neuter. “Ein” we
   use for masculine and neuter nouns and “Eine” for feminine nouns. We also saw the word or the words for
   “my”. How was that?
Student: “Mein”
Teacher: “Mein” or…
   “Meine”
Student: “Meine”. So we have “mein” for masculine and neuter nouns and “meine” for feminine nouns, like, “my
   blouse”, for example.
Teacher: “Meine bluse”
Student: “Meine Bluse.” We also saw the word for your talking informally.
Teacher: “Dein, deine.”
Student: “Dein, deine”. Good. So your street would be ?
Teacher: “Dein…deine strasse”.
Student: Very good. Deine Strasse. We also have kein and keine. Kein and keine mean “no” in the sense of “not any
   ” like “no problem”, when you say “no problem”, you mean “not any problem”, This is “kein problem”,
   “keinProblem”
Teacher: “Kein problem”
Student: “Kein Problem”. How would you say “this is no problem”… “This is no problem”
Teacher: “Das ist kein problem”
Student: Very good. “Das ist kein problem”. “I have no problem “or I don’t have a problem. So you want to translate,
   I don’t have .”Ich habe nicht “. You will translate I have no problem
Teacher: “Ich habe kein problem”
Student: “Ich habe kein problem”, good. What was “a street”?
Teacher: “Eine strasse”
Student: “Eine strasse”, “my street?”
Teacher: “Meine Strasse”
Student: “No strreet?”
Teacher: “Keine Strasse.”
Student: “Keine stasse”, good. Do you see my street? This talk formally or plurally, “Do you see my street?”
Teacher: “Sehen, see meine strasse”
Student: “We don’t see any street, we see no street”
Teacher: “Wir sehen nict keine Strasse”
Student: So you don’t need “nicht” , you would just say “We see no street”
Teacher: “Wir sehen keine strasse”
Student: “Wir sehen keine Strasse”. What was “to have”
Teacher: “Haben”
Student: “Haben”. “I have?”
Teacher: “Ich hab”
   “Ich hab, ich habe”. “We have?”
Student: “Wir haben”
Teacher: “Wir haben”, “you have?” Talking informally, we have “du”, “du hast…du hast…”
Student: “Du hast”
Teacher: So, it probably started life as “du habst” but its kinds too complicated to put so many sounds together for
   such a common verb , “du habst… du habst… du hast”, you can see are easily over time that ‘b’
   disappeared, “du hast …du hast”
Student: “Du hast”
Teacher: “Do you have my blouse?”
Student: “Hast du meine bluse?”
Teacher: “Hast du meine Bluse?” Good. So this e at the end of “eine… meine… keine…” we have said is for feminine
   but its also for the plural, the feminine and the plural are connected in German. And you see this frau
   Geman, interestingly the feminine and the plural are connected in other curious ways in other languages
   too. Such as Arabic and Greek, for example. So you are an Arabic speaker. Can you tell me how the plural
   and feminine are connected in the odd way in Arabic?
Student: No
Teacher: Plural objects , you always treat them with feminine adjectives no?, and the feminine word?
Student: Ya..ya..ya
Teacher: Ya, so you find that weird connection between plural and feminine in quite a few languages, so we’ve seen
   the plural word in German already. We’ve seen the word for Children which is not child, it’s children. Its
   plural. So how is that word children?
Student: “Kinder”
Teacher: “Kinder”. My children, there we are going to use, what we’ve learnt as the feminine “my”, so what was
   that?
Student: “Meine Kinder”.
Teacher: So “meine” is for feminine and plural. “Meine Kinder”. “Your children”, speaking informally?
Student: “Deine Kinder”.
Teacher: “Deine Kinder”. “No children”?
Student: “Keine Kinder”.
Teacher: “Keine Kinder”. How do you say, “we have no children. We don’t have children”.
Student: “Wir haben keine Kinder”.
Teacher: “Wir haben keine Kinder”. We have no children. Child, child in singular is “kind”… “kind”
Student: “Kind”
Teacher: But its spelt K-I-N-D. So again like in “bald”- “soon”, “Like” in “mund”- “mouth”, “rund” -“round”, “grund”-
   “ ground”, we have the ‘d’ at the end of the syllable pronounced like ‘t’. Kind.
   Kind
Student: Kind. But when we put the “er” for the plural, actually this ‘d’ is not at the end of the syllable anymore, it
   becomes the first of the next syllable. Kin-der. So it soften. Kinder. It becomes a new syllable. Kinder.
   Kinder.
Teacher: Kinder.
Student: SO let’s make a little recap. What was the word for ”a”?
Teacher: “Ein”
Student: Or?
Teacher: “Eine”
Student: “Ein” or “eine”. We had the word for “my”
Teacher: “Mein”
Student: And?
Teacher: “Meine”
Student: Good. “Your” talking informally
Teacher: “Dein, deine”
Student: “Dein, deine” . Good. For “no” as in “no problem”
Teacher: “Kein, keine”
Student: “Kein, keine” . So we get all of this by adding on to “ein”. Ein mein dein kein. We can even get the word for
   “no”, not in the sense of “no problem” but in the sense of “DO you want one? No, no I don’t”
Teacher: “Nein”
Student: “Nein”…Exactly, “nein”. Good.
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: We mentioned how number one in German is “eins - eins”
Student: Eins
Teacher: And we get the word for “a” out of that as well “ein - eine”. Number two in German is “zwei”
Student: Zwei
Teacher: Zwei. Zwei is spelled Z W E I we’ve already seen how the Z in German is prononunced “tz”, T Z. We will find
   the English T turning into a German Z and this is what we see in “two” which is of course spelled T W O in
   English, and “zwei” in German. We have the Z like TS, we have the W like a V and then we have that EI
   giving us I. Zwei.
Student: Zwei
Teacher: So this is “two” like the number two in German but if you want to say “to”, like “in order to”, like the “too”
   that we use in “too quiet - too warm” then we can look at the spelling in English and change that T over to a
   Z
   Zu
Student: Zu, in German, Z U
Teacher: Zu
Student: And the U is long, “zu”
Teacher: Zu
Student: What was the word for “is” in German?
Teacher: Ist
Student: Ist. And “it is”?
Teacher: Its ist
Student: What is the word for it? “I want it”?
Teacher: Ah, es!
Student: Yes, it doesn’t change, it’s the same “it”. So, “it is”?
Teacher: Es ist
Student: “It is warm”? And “warm” is the same word in German as it is in English, so “it is warm”?
Teacher: Es ist w-warm
Student: When I say it’s the same word you still have to germanify it a little bit, no? Think about how it is written
Teacher: Warm
Student: Ah, perfect! “Es ist warm”, perfect. “It is too warm”?
Teacher: Es ist zu warm.
Student: Es ist zu warm. To say “warmer” we say “wärmer”
Teacher: Wärmer
Student: This is because adding the ER very often we add an umlaut, we add two dots. So if we have “warm” when
   we add on that ER, the A is going to take on two little dots, “wärmer”, that’s part of the change that comes
   with ER
Teacher: Now, we haven’t noticed it yet because of course we couldn’t do this before with for example “spät” and
   “später” because “spät” is spelled A with two dots, it already has them there. So when we say “später” we
   have no change. But with “warm” we have W A R M and when we add on the ER to say “warmer” that will
   add two dots over that A. So, “it is warmer”?
Student: Es ist wärmer
Teacher: Es ist wärmer. So we can’t add an umplaut, we can’t add those two dots to any vowel, no? We can’t add it
   to an E because those two dots give us the quality of an E, we’re not going to add the quality of an E to an
   E, no? We can’t add it to an I, because an I already has a dot so as in “Kind - Kinder” we don’t have any
   change in that I of “Kind”. But we can add it to an O so this takes us from O to Ö like in “bird”, like in
   “können”. We can add it to an U, this takes us from the U sound of “ich muss” to the Ü sound of “über -
   müssen” and we can add it to an A which takes us from an A, sound of “das” to an A sound of “spät”, from
   “wärm” to “wärmer”. So this is something we will have to think about when we are adding an ER, either like
   in “warm - warmer”, “wärm - wärmer” or as a plural. What was the word for “big”, do you remember the
   word for “big”?
Student: Gross
Teacher: Gross
Student: How would you say “this is too big”? What is the word for “this”?
Teacher: Das
Student: Das. “This is too big”?
Teacher: Das ist so gross
Student: “Das ist so gross sounds” like “this is so big”, but if you want “to”?
Teacher: Zu
Student: Zu. Make that vowel longer, “zu”
Teacher: Zu
Student: The U, in German, is a long sound like “food”, no? Like the double O in “food” and ?? we have a double
   consonant after it, shortening it, no? Like in “must” (?) but generally is a long vowel like in “zu”. “Das ist zu
   gross”. “This is so big”?
Teacher: Das ist so-so gross
Student: Good. So the S sounds like a Z “das ist so gross”. How would you say “this is bigger”? “This is bigger”
Teacher: Das ist grösser
Student: So, I can hear that you are trying to put the two dots but I think it’s good to take time to import this sound,
   to make sure that you are getting the right sound. So where can you look to get the O with umlaut? The O
   with the two dots
Teacher: Können
Student: Ok, so “Können”
Teacher: Können, grösser
Student: Good, “das ist grösser”, good. “Cold” is “kalt” K A L T
Teacher: Kalt
Student: How would you say “it is cold”?
Teacher: Es ist kalt
Student: Es ist kalt. “It is colder - it is colder”?
Teacher: Est ist kölder
Student: So you are making a change but you are not really in control of this change, I can here that you know that
   putting that ER changes the vowel before, what we need to do is to think what vowel we have in “kalt”
Teacher: A
   An A. So, that’s where we are going to put that umlaut, our two dots, so how is that A with two dots going
   to sound?
Student: Ö
Teacher: There is a word that’s very common for you that ?? with two dots. You should go back there, you should
   take the time to go back there and to find the pronunciation. You are not going to have to do this many
   times but to insist and to do it is going to give you a lot of confidence. What’s the word for “late”?
Student: Spät
Teacher: Spät. And how is it spelled?
Student: SPAT
Teacher: And what does that A have?
Student: Two dots
Teacher: Yes, it’s “spät”. So we can look back at “spät” whenever we find ?? with an A with two dots over it to
   import the sound over. So tell me “it is colder”
Student: Es ist kälter
Teacher: Good. “Es ist kälter”. So “kalt” becomes “kälter”. How would you say “it is too cold”?
Student: Es ist zu kalt
Teacher: Es ist zu kalt
German Track - Level: Easy
Teacher: So we saw “two” as in the number two, was?
Student: Zwei
Teacher: Zwei, good. Z W E I. And that Z gives us “TS”, “zwei”. And we saw “too” we saw it in the sense of “too warm
Student:  too loud” which was?
Teacher: Zu
Student: Zu, good. T O O becoming Z U, “zu”. This “zu” could also be used when we imply “in order to” in English. For
   example, to say “I feel like it - I feel like it”, in German, you would say “I have lust”, “lust”, “I have lust” and
   this means “I feel like it” and “lust” is the same word in English and German, “lust”. So how would you say
   that, “I have lust”?
Teacher: Ich habe lust, lust
Student: Good, ich habe lust, or “ich hab lust”. So this means “I feel like it” no? And generally you will use it as part
   of a bigger sentence where you would say something like “I feel like going”. Now, when you say “I have lust
   to go” you are implying “I have lust in order to go”. When you are implying this feeling of “in order to” the
   “to go”, “gehen” is not enough. You must say “I have lust in order to go” there you will need to use “zu” in
   German. So how would you say that “I feel like going - I have lust in order to go”?
Teacher: Ich habe lust zu gehen
Student: Ich habe lust zu gehen, good. How would you say “you have” speaking informally, it was “du”?
Teacher: Du habst
   It would be “habst” but what happened? There was a sligh irregularity, many years of “habst - habst -
   habst”
Student: Hast
Teacher: Hast
Student: Du hast
Teacher: Du hast
Student: “Do you feel like eating”, “do you have lust in order to eat”?
Teacher: Hast du lust zu essen
Student: Very good, Hast du lust zu essen? How would you say “we feel like seeing it”? So you will say “we have lust
   it to see”
Teacher: Wir haben lust es zu sehen
Student: Very good, “wir haben lust es zu sehen”. What was the word for “what”?
Teacher: Was
Student: Was, “somewhat - somewhat” is “etwas - etwas” E T W A S, “etwas”
Teacher: Etwas
Student: How would you say “this is somewhat big - this is somewhat big”
Teacher: Das ist etwas groß
Student: Very good, das ist etwas groß. And “somewhat” sounds formal in German as it does in English. How would
   you say “this is somewhat bigger”?
Teacher: Das ist etwas großer
Student: Good, but what appens to “groß” when you add the ER, something else happens
Teacher: It has two points, größer
Student: So, to find the pronounciation of that O with two dots on it, the O with the umlaut, where do you look back
   to, to be sure?
Teacher: Bird
Student: Bird, and then you are sure you have the right pronounciation there with “bird”. So we got that “bird” we
   export that sound
Teacher: Größer
Student: Größer. Thinking about the O is going to produce something that feels closer to you to an O but the sound
   in “bird” has very little to do with O, for us, no? So you really want to litterally and slowly export that sound
   from “bird” and then use it to build
Teacher: Größer
Student: Bird, größer, bravo. “This is somewhat bigger”?
Teacher: Das ist etwas größer
   Das ist etwas größer. How would you say “it is, it is somewhat warm”?
Student: Es ist etwas warm
Teacher: It is somewhat warm, es ist etwas warm. “It is somewhat warmer”?
Student: Es ist etwas warmer
Teacher: And again, what happens here when you put the ER?
Student: It has two dots on the A
Teacher: Ok, so I don’t want you to guess about how that should sound, I want you to look somewhere to find that
   sound and import it and that might take some time but that’s ok, no? This is how you well install
   confidence with the different sounds of vowels in German
Student: Spät
Teacher: Spät, so this word can act like a hook to look back to whenever you need a reminding on how A with the
   umlaut should sound and then import that sound over to give me “it is somewhat warmer”
Student: Es ist etwas wärmer
Teacher: Es ist etwas wärmer, good. “Etwas”, other than “somewhat”, also means “something” and of course you
   will hear “etwas” much more as “something” than as “somewhat” especially as like in English “somewhat”
   is quite formal, in German. So, “etwas” we also have for “something”. How would you say “do you feel like
   eating something?”? “do you feel like eating something?”, speaking informally
Student: Hast du lust etwas zu essen, zu etwas essen
Teacher: Your first one was correct “zu” is going to stay next to the verb, no? “Essen” is “to eat” and then “zu” gives
   us that feeling of “in order to eat” and it’s going to stay next to the verb “zu essen”. So, “hast du lust etwas
   zu essen?”. “Do you feel like cooking something?”?
Student: Hast du lust etwas zu kochen
Teacher: How would you say “do you want to cook something?”? Again, informally. “Do you want to cook
   something?”?
Student: Willst tu etwas kochen?
Teacher: Very good, Willst du etwas kochen? You might hear “etwas” contracted to “was” in spoken German, don’t
   let that confuse you, it’s not “what” you will know what the word is by the position of the word. So, instead
   of “etwas” you might hear ”was”, in spoken. So, for example, if you say “do you want to cook something?”,
   contracting this “etwas” to “was”? How is it going to sound?
Student: Willst du was kochen?
Teacher: Willst du was kochen? So here we know is “etwas” by the position, if it was “what” where would that be?
   “what do you want to cook?”?
Student: Was willst du kochen?
Teacher: Good, was willst du kochen? “What do you want to cook” but then “do you want to cook something? -
   Willst du was kochen” so that “was” is just “etwas”
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: The word “lust” is a feminine word, so how would you say “I don’t feel like eating - I have no lust in order to
   eat”?
Student: Keine
Teacher: Good, so “I have no lust in order to eat”
Student: Ich habe keine lust zu essen
Teacher: Good, because here the “to eat” implies “in order to eat”. “I don’t have any lust in order to eat” and for
   that reason we use “zu” here. So, “essen” by itself is “to eat” already, we’ve seen that “I want to eat - ich
   will essen” but when that “to” implies “in order to” you will find “zu” popping up “ich habe keine lust zu
   essen”. “To search” is “suchen”
Student: Suchen
Teacher: “To search” or “to seek”, much more like “to seek” because when we say in English “I seek it” we don’t use
   anything else, any “for” like we do in “search”, “I search for it” and the verb is like this in German so we can
   think of it like “seek” with the K to CH shift “seek - suchen” S U C H E N
Student: Suchen
Teacher: So, let’s look for “seek”, how would you say “I’m looking for it”?
Student: Ich suche es
Teacher: “Ich suche es” or “ich suche es” and with the contraction, with the S, how would that sound?
Student: Ich such’s
Teacher: Ich such’s, good, ich such’s, with the contraction. “What are you looking for?”, talking informally, talking (?)
   to “du”
Student: Was suchst du?
Teacher: Very good. Was suchst du? “Are you looking for it?”
Student: Suchst du es?
Teacher: Very good. Suchst du es? And with the contraction? Can you contract anything there?
Student: Suchst du’s?
Teacher: Very good. Suchst du’s? “Do you look for it? - Are you looking for it?” Suchst du’s? So, before we saw that
   we have “verstehen” which is “to understand” and then “stehen” which is “stand”. We saw that we have
   “kaufen - to buy” and then “to sell” was?
Student: Verkaufen
Teacher: Verkaufen. So this VER is quite a common addition, this V E R, remember it’s V because the V letter in
   German in pronounced like F. What was “to search” or “to seek”?
Student: Such
Teacher: “To search - to seek”?
Student: Suchen
Teacher: Suchen. It’s very important that when we mention “to” you think of the verb ends in the EN, this is your
   launching pad, this is the verb you are always going to go back to, to work with so it is very important that
   mentally you acquaint (?) “to” with the EN. “Suchen”. “Versuchen” means “to try”. So this VER is quite
   unpredictable in the change that it results in, no? The meaning from “stand” to “understand”, the meaning
   from “to buy - to sell” from “to search” to “to try” they are quite varied, no? The differences in meaning,
   there. There is no pattern there in the meaning, but we will identify some interesting patterns in the use of
   VER and we will encounter it very often in German. So, how is “I’m trying”?
Student: Ich versuche
Teacher: Ich versuche, Ich versuch. If you want to say “I’m trying to do it”, in German, this is “I’m trying in order to
   do it”. In German there is a “in order to” implied there, which means you must use?
Student: Zu
Teacher: Zu, good. So, “I’m trying to do it - I’m trying in order to do it”?
Student: Ich versuche es zu machen
Teacher: Very good, ich versuche es zu machen, very good. So, we say “in order to do it - in order to make it”, and
   that doesn’t feel great in English but that’s ok, we are not looking for what feels great in direct translations,
   we are looking for a sense, we are looking for the feeling of “in order to” to understand where we should
   use “zu” in German. So, (??) it doesn’t sound great in English “I’m trying in order to do it” it definitely fits, it
   fits, so we use “zu” in German. “Ich versuche es zu machen”. What was the word for “late”?
Student: Spät
Teacher: Spät. And “later”?
Student: Später
Teacher: Später. How would you say “I’m trying to look for it - I’m trying to look for it”
Student: Ich versuche es zu suchen
Teacher: Very good, ich versuche es zu suchen or, ich versuch’s zu suchen. How would you say “I try to look for it
   later - I try to look for it later”?
Student: Ich versuch es später zu suchen
Teacher: Good, ich versuch es später zu suchen, very good “I try to look for it later” with the contraction “Ich
   versuch’s später zu suchen”. So we have “suchen - to seek - to look for - to search”, “versuchen - to try” and
   “besuchen” means “to visit - besuchen”
Student: Besuchen
Teacher: How would you say “I visit”?
Student: Ich besuch
Teacher: Ich besuch, Ich besuche. “You visit”? Talking informally
Student: Du besuchst
Teacher: Du besuchst. “I’m visiting you”? The formal or the plural, or “I’m visiting them - later”?
Student: Ich besuch Sie später
   Good, ich besuch Sie später. “I try to visit you -or them- later - I try to visit them later”? So, the first thought
   is “I try”
Teacher: Ich versuch Sie später besuchen
Student: In order to visit
Teacher: Zu besuchen
Student: Very good “I try - Ich versuche - in order to - visit them later - Sie später zu besuchen”, very good.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: What was the word for “you”, the informal “you”?
Student: Du
Teacher: Du. And how would you say “you understand”?
Student: Du verstehst
Teacher: Du verstehst. “I understand you” is “ich verstehe dich”. So we have “du” when the verb is changing, for you
   “du verstehst, du kommst”, but when it’s not, we have “dich”. “I see you - Ich sehe dich”, “I understand you
   - Ich verstehe dich”. It’s actually exactly the same difference that what we have between “I” and “me”, “ich
   - mich”. We have “ich” and “mich” and we have “du” and “dich”. Only that in English the word for “you”
   doesn’t change so it might seem complicated that we have two words for “you” but it’s not, it’s exactly the
   same difference in “I” and “me”, “ich” and “mich”, “du” and “dich”. So, how would you say “I don’t
   understand you”?
Student: Ich verstehe dich nicht
Teacher: Good but less friction again, Ich verstehe dich nicht, there is no friction in any of them, good. So, I don’t
   understand you, “Ich verstehe dich”, you understand “du verstehst” and as we saw, for the formal you
   “Sie”, there is no change between those two “yous”. So, “you -formal- understand”, “you -plural-
   understand”, is?
Student: Sie verstehen
Teacher: Sie verstehen. “I understand you”?
Student: Ich verstehe Sie
Teacher: Good, ich verstehe Sie. So, “Sie” doesn’t change, no? We have “Sie” and “Sie” for both of those two
   different use as we do in English but with “du” we have “du” and “dich”. “Warten” or “warten” is “to wait”.
   W A R T E N but you can hear “warten” or “warten" with the T pronounced or not, just like in English
   “bottle” or “bottle” and the most common in German is to hear “warten”
Student: Warten
Teacher: If you say “I wait for you” in German you won’t say “for you” you will say “on you”, “I’m waiting on you”,
   “auf dich - auf dich”. Auf is spelled A U F. So how would you say “I am waiting on you”?
Student: Ich warte auf dich
Teacher: Ich warte auf dich. “Are they waiting for me? - Are they waiting on me?”?
Student: Warten sie auf mich?
Teacher: Warten sie auf mich? Good. “You wait”, talking informally is “du wartest - du wartest”
   Du wartest
Student: And “you find”, speaking informally is “du findest"
Teacher: Du findest
Student: So this is because after a T or a D we can’t add the “ST”. “Du wartst - du findsts”, it’s too complicated so
   German sticks in a little E to help there. So for “du” you are adding “EST” in this cases “du wartest - du
   findest”. How would you say “don’t you find it?”, talking informally?
Teacher: Findest du, findest du’s nicht?
Student: Very good, well ?? with the contraction. “Findest du’s nicht? - Findest du es nicht?” Good.
Teacher: “Don’t you find anything? Don’t you find nothing?”
Student: Findest du
Teacher: How do we get “nothing”? We have “nicht" for “not”
Student: Nichts
Teacher: So, “Don’t you find anything? Don’t you find nothing?”
Student: Findest du nichts?
Teacher: Findest du nichts? Good. “To answer” is “antworten - antworten” that is spelled A N T W O R T E N
   “antworten”
Student: Antworten
Teacher: That is “to answer”. What was the word for “we”?
Student: Wir
Teacher: And “us”, do you remember?
Student: Uns
Teacher: Uns, good. U N S, “us”. How would you say “they don’t answer us”? Or “they are not answering us”?
Student: Sie antworten uns nicht
Teacher: Very good, “sie antworten uns nicht”. “you don’t answer us”, speaking informally. “You don’t answer us”?
Student: Du antwortest
Teacher: Very good, you have to add “EST” here, no? “Du antwortest”. “You don’t answer us”?
Student: Du antwortest uns nicht
Teacher: Very good. Du antwortest uns nicht.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: So we’ve seen that the CH in German is soft when there’s is an I or an E sound before so like in ICH, DICH,
   NICHT but when we have another vowel sound before like in “suchen”, “machen”, we get a hard CH so in
   the real world syllables exist rather that individual sounds, individual phonics (??) so which is why as far as
   we know an alphabet was only invented once in all of human history because it was quite an unnatural way
   to think about sounds, there were natural ways to think about syllables KU, KA, KI, SU, SA, SI, rather than
   dividing up the K and the U
Student: So we see that here in German as well what is more important is the syllable to understand the sound so
   when we have an E or I sound before CH we get soft CH, ICH, ECH and when we have another vowel we
   have hard CH like in “suchen”, “machen”
Teacher: so we saw that the English K can become the German CH. “To break” is spelled B R E C H E N, so how would
   you pronounce that?
Student: Brechen
Teacher: Brechen
Student: So here we have an E before the CH that is giving us a soft CH, Brechen
Teacher: Brechen
Student: Good
Teacher: “To speak” is “Sprechen”, that’s S P R E C H E N, Sprechen. Again a soft CH
Student: Sprechen
Teacher: Much better, Sprechen How would you say “Do you speak German?” talking formally. The word for German is Deutsch, Deutsch.
   “Do you speak German?”
Student: Sprechen Sie Deutsch?
Teacher: Deutsch is spelled D E U T S C H so EU in German gives us EU, gives us this EU sound. You hear people
   talking about the Euro and they talk about the Euro in German, Euro. EU gives us EU. And this T S C H altogether just gives us TSCH, Deutsch
Student: Deutsch
Teacher: Which, interestingly, sounds a lot like the word Dutch in English no? And there is a reason for this of course.
   The English word for Dutch, which is of course the same as the German word for German, used to refer to
   continental German people generally, no? They were referred to as “The Dutch”. Then the sense narrowed later to the Netherlands in around the
   17th century. There’s a lot of slang in English that refers to negative things as “Dutch”. Even the idea of
   splitting the bill on a date which you might think of something more positive was considered quite a
   negative thing in English culture and this is called “to go Dutch”. They put the Dutch there and that kind of
   made it something undesirable. So, in English, when we refer to people from the Netherlands, we use the
   German word for German when we call them Dutch. How would you say “Can we speak German?” So how would you say that “Can we speak German?”
Student: Können wir sprechen Deutsch?
Teacher: It’s a little bit lost, no? Deutsch outside of the …
Student: Können wir Deutsch sprechen?
Teacher: Very good, Können wir Deutsch sprechen?
   “Riechen” in German, means “to smell”. Now you might be familiar in English with the word “to reek”, no?
   To reek means “to really smell”, “to stink”, “to smell bad” or “to have a really ???” “it reeks of soup” for
   example. Now English is a language that takes lots of different words from different languages and holds
   onto them all. English holds onto a great amount of vocabulary that it comes across. Now what English
   does to hold on to some much vocabulary is to give all the vocabulary a slightly different register, a slightly
   different feeling otherwise there’s no real reason to hold onto it. There are not really any too true
   synonyms don’t really get towards (??) with exactly the same meaning otherwise one of them falls out of
   use. There’s no reason to hold onto them. So, “Riechen”, just a normal word for “to smell” in German exists
   in English but it has a slightly different connotation to “reek”, to like really smell. But in German that’s just a
   normal verb for “to smell”, “Riechen”. So if you want to say “I smell it”
Student: Ich Rieche’s
Teacher: Ich Rieche’s or Ich Rieche es. Ich Rieche’s, Ich Rieche es. If you want to say “to reek” or “to stink” in German
   you will use “to stink”, “Stinken”
Student: Stinken
Teacher: So this is something we want to very mind, That we can share words with German and English but the
   register of the meaning or the connotation might change quite drastically so you want to watch out for that
   we don’t want to just take on a lot of similar something vocabulary without keeping our ears attentive to
   how it might be used differently. Another example would be the world for “dog”. The word for “dog” in
   German is “Hund”, “Hund”
Student: Hund
Teacher: It is spelled H U N D so in English we have the word Hound which we can use to refer to a dog maybe in a ??
   kind of way or maybe in a less personal kind of way or even there are some breeds of dog that contain
   “hound” like “Greyhound” for example. So in English a every day word is “dog” and then Hound has a
   slightly different connotation but in German the every day word for dog is “Hund”, “Hound”. We also see
   the OU to U pattern. “Hound” is spelled H O U N D and “Hund” H U N D.
Student: “To know” in German is Wissen, Wissen
Teacher: Wissen
Student: It’s spelled W I S S E N, Wissen
Teacher: Wissen
Student: Like “wise”, like the word “wise” in English. How would you say “Do you know where my dog is?” Speaking
   formally. Firstly what was the word for “where”, very short word
Teacher: Wo
Student: “Wo”, so speaking formally “Do you know where my dog is?”
Teacher: Wissen Sie wo mein Hund ist?
Student: Good, Wissen Sie wo mein Hund ist? And here the order is exactly the same as in English, no?
Teacher: Do you know - Wissen Sie
Student: where - wo
Teacher: my dog is - mein Hund ist
   I know, I know is “Ich weiß”, Ich weiß
Student: Ich weiß
Teacher: Ich weiß, so this is irregular. Wissen, Ich weiß. How would you say “I know it”?
Student: Ich weiß’s
Teacher: Ich weiß es. I don’t know it
Student: Ich weiß es nicht
Teacher: Good, Ich weiß es nicht. “I don’t know where your house is”. “I don’t know”, that’s the first bit.
Student: Ich weiß’s nicht
Teacher: “Where your house is” and we are speaking informally
Student: Wo dein
Teacher: Good
Student: Dein Haus ist
Teacher: Good, “Ich weiß nicht wo dein Haus ist”. I don’t know where your house is. Good.
Student: So as we saw with kann and kannst, and will and willst, and muss and musst when we have an irregular
   version for the ?? form we saw that that irregularity tends to carry over to “Du” that’s why we have kann
   and kannst from können and will and willst from wollen. So Ich weiß and du?
Teacher: weißt
Student: weißt, du weißt
Teacher: Do you know where my dog is?
Student: Weißt du wo mein Hund ist?
Teacher: Very good, “weißt du wo mein Hund ist?“
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: So we mentioned that we have three genders for nouns in German, we have neutral, we have feminine and
   we have masculine and we also mentioned that we can identify nouns as words where we can put “the” or
   A in front of. So, “the child” is a noun. We also have three genders in English: “she, he, it”. Give us our three
   genders in English “she” is feminine, “he” is masculine and “it” is neutral. It has no gender, it’s neutral, it’s
   neutral. Now you might tell me “Well you can say the same for any language”, but you can’t . For example
   in Turkish “he, she” and “it” are all the same word. Turkish doesn’t have any gender whatsoever. “he, she”
   and “it” is all the same word
Student: But English does. English does already have masculine, feminine and neutral. Only that in German every
   noun can be masculine, feminine or neutral. So, this distinction that we do have in English is just used much
   more in German. What was the world for “the” that we saw?
Teacher: Die
Student: Die, D I E we said the I E gives us this “E” sound. Die
   This is the word for feminine and for plural words. We saw that the feminine and the plural are connected
   in German. So “the children” is?
Teacher: Die Kinder
Student: Die Kinder. So this “er” plural pattern like “Kind” to “Kinder” is mostly for short neutral words who find it
   used mostly with short neutral words of one syllable. That means “Kind” is neutral, “the child” is neutral.
   Which is interesting, maybe it’s because as a child they don’t have yet the gender, maybe that’s the idea.
   “The blouse”?
Teacher: Die Bluse
Student: Die Bluse. “Die Frau”? “Die Frau” means “the woman”
Teacher: Die Frau
Student: Frau is spelled F R A U, “die Frau”. So we have “die” for “the”, for feminine and for plural. The word for
   “she” in German is “Sie”, “Sie”
Teacher: “Sie”
Student: Which of course is also the word for “They”, no? So, again we are seeing this connection between the
   feminine and the plural. We have “die” for feminine and plural and “she” for feminine and plural. “They” is
   plural, is the plural for “he” or “she”, to “his” is they. To ??? are they. No? And of course “sie” is like “die”
   with an S “die”, “sie”
Teacher: So what was the word for “she”?
Student: Sie
Teacher: Sie, “She is”?
Student: Sie ist
Teacher: Sie ist. “She is here”?
Student: Sie ist hier
Teacher: Sie ist hier. What was the word for “they”?
Student: Sie
Teacher: Sie. Also “they”. “They are” is “Sie sind”, “Sie sind”
Student: Sie sind
Teacher: So, “sind” means “are”. “They are here”
Student: Sie sind hier
Teacher: Sie sind hier. “Sind” is spelled S I N D. So you have the S pronounced like a Z and the D on the end of the
   syllable pronounced like a T. “Sie sind”. “The children are here”?
Student: Die Kinder sind hier
Teacher: Good, Die Kinder sind hier. “Are your children here?”, “Are your children here?”?
Student: Sind dein Kinder hier?
Teacher: Good, but “dein” we would use for masculine and neutral. What was the word for feminine and for plural?
Student: Deine
Teacher: Deine, good. So, “Are your children here?”?
Student: Sind deine Kinder hier?
Teacher: Good, Sind deine Kinder hier? Very good. Child “Kind”, I mentioned was neutral. “The child” is “das Kind”
Student: Das Kind
Teacher: What was the word for “it”?
Student: Es
Teacher: Es, and we said that “it” was neutral. And we can see a connection between “es” and “das”. Das is like “es”
   with a D. Ok, it changes a little bit but it’s like “es” with a D. Das. And even in some dialects of German you
   can hear “des” instead of “das”. So there you see the connection maintained between the word for “it”,
   “es” and the neutral word for “the”, “das”, or in some dialects “des”. And of course we also saw that “das”
   meant “this” or “that”. So, the word for “it”?
Student: Es
Teacher: Es, and that’s neutral and “the child”?
Student: Das Kind
Teacher: Das Kind, good. “House” is also neutral. So, “the house”?
Student: Das Haus
Teacher: Das Haus. Masculine words so, for example, “Hund”, dog, takes “der” for “the” that’s D E R, der
Student: Der
Teacher: Der. “The hound”, “the dog”?
Student: Der Hund
Teacher: Der Hund. “The man”? “Man is the same word
Student: Der Mann
Teacher: Der Mann. So “Der” is the word for “the” for masculine words. The word for “he” is “er”
Student: Er
Teacher: Er. So we are seeing the connection here, no? Between the words for “he, she, it” and the different words
   for “the”. Let’s go through it again. What’s the word for “she”, for “they”?
Student: Sie
Teacher: And what is the word for “the”, for feminine and for plural?
Student: Die
Teacher: So we have “sie” and “die” , connected in the meaning and sounding very similar. What was the word for
   “it”?
Student: Es
Teacher: Es. And this was neutral. We said that “it” was neutral. It doesn’t refer to any gender. “it”. How would you
   say “the child”?
Student: Das Kind
Teacher: Das Kind. So “das” is like “es” with a D. Ok it changes to an A here no? “das” but “das” is a phonetic change
   to make it easier. “es, das”. And finally we saw that we have the word “he” which is “er” so how would you
   say “He is here”?
Student: Er ist hier
Teacher: Er ist hier. But if you want to say “the dog is here” and dog is masculine?
Student: Der Hund ist hier
Teacher: Der Hund ist hier. And of course the addition of a D to Z to S to R is just a TH that we have in the English
   word for “the” is the TH to D shift. So “er” plus D, “der”. “she” plus D “die”, “es” plus D, “das” or as we
   mentioned even in some dialects “des”. So you can tell me “she is here”?
Student: Sie ist hier
Teacher: Sie ist hier. “The woman is here”? Woman was “Frau”
Student: Die Frau ist hier
Teacher: Die Frau ist hier. How would you say “they are here”?
Student: Sie sind hier
Teacher: Sie sind hier. “The children are here”?
Student: Die Kinder sind hier
Teacher: Die Kinder sind hier. “It is hier”?
Student: Es ist hier
Teacher: Es ist hier. “The house is here”?
Student: Das Haus ist hier
Teacher: Das Haus ist hier. “He is here”?
Student: Er ist hier
Teacher: Er ist hier. “The man is here”?
Student: Der Mann is hier
Teacher: Der Mann is hier. So these connection between words like “sie”, “er”, “es” and the word for “the” we are
   going to find ?? German.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: We said that the word for “child” was “Kind” and the word for “children” was?
Student: Kinder
Teacher: Kinder. So we are adding this ER to get the plural and also the D is softening again becoming like a D again
   rather than a T because it’s not at the end of the syllable anymore, it’s not in a new syllable “Kinder” rather
   than “Kind”. So we saw two uses of this ER ending in German, one to make a word plural and then the
   other to give the meaning of more, like in “late - more late - or later”, no? “spät - später” well, actually it’s
   doing the same thing in both cases: “Kind - child”, “Kinder - more child, children”. “Spät - late, Später - more
   late, later”. Another way of making nouns plural is by adding an E. What was the word for “dog”?
Student: Hund
Teacher: Hund. And “the dog”?
Student: Der Hund
Teacher: Der Hund, masculine. “The dogs” is “Die Hunde”
Student: Die Hunde
Teacher: And we notice so that D is soft again because it’s not in the end of the syllable like in “der Hund”. “Die
   Hunde”. So we add an E and we get the plural “die Hunde”. Plural nouns, whatever gender they were at the
   beginning, they are all going to take “die”. Just like “Sie” means “they”. You respect people gender. So this
   “die” doesn’t meant that “Hund” is becoming feminine, no? This is the plural “die”. Die Hunde, the dogs.
   How would you say “my dogs”?
Student: Meine Hunde
Teacher: Meine Hunde, So again this “meine” is for plural. How would you say “my dog is here”?
Student: Mein Hund ist hier
Teacher: Good, Mein Hund ist hier. “My dogs are here”?
Student: Meine Hunde sind hier
Teacher: Good but “Hunde”?
Student: Hunde
Teacher: Hunde, good. Because now the D is starting the syllable, Hunde. “Mine Hunde sind hier”. So sometimes you
   come across the world in German and you won’t know if it’s feminine or plural, because of course we have
   seen how this E on the end can be both feminine as in “die Bluse” and plural as in “die Hunde” so you will
   have to look a the context around the word and figure out for yourself whether you are looking at a plural
   noun or a feminine noun. For example “cat” is “Katze, Katze”
Student: Katze
Teacher: K A T Z E, Katze
Student: Katze
Teacher: So, “die Katze” if you would come across “die Katze” as far you know could be “the cats” or “the cat”, it
   could be “the cats” or it could be “the cat” as a feminine word if you don’t know the word you are not
   going to know when you come across it. So you want to look around the context to figure out whether you
   are looking at the feminine word or a plural. Or if you learn a word from a dictionary for example you want
   to learn it as a singular word and with the gender. Learning with the word for “the“ in the singular. This way
   when you have to use the noun when you have to do something with it you are not asking so for the first
   time “oh, what gender is this word”. So “die Katze” is a singular word and it’s feminine. So we saw that ER
   plural that often we have to ad an “umlaut” before, for example “the word” is “das Wort”, das Wort, W O R
   T and we make this word plural with the ER ending we said that for many neutral short words of one
   syllable this would be our plural ending. So we see “das Wort”, this is neutral, little short word we can
   suspect that it will become plural with ER. How might that sound? “The words”. This is actually spelled with
   a T so you won’t soften it
Student: Die Worter
Teacher: When you add the ER onto “Wort” the O takes an umlaut. So to find the sound what word do we look at in
   English to find the sound of the O with two dots over it?
Student: Bird
Teacher: Good, good. So now give me the plural or “Wort”
Student: Die Wörter
Teacher: Die Wörter. It’s actually the same vowel not only as we have in “bird” also as we have in “word” in English.
   And this will happen often, you will find some version of the German word that really sounds like the
   English one then you will understand where the English sounding word might have come from, what
   version of German it might come from. “Word” sounds like “Wörter” the same vowel “word - bird -
   Wörter”. Another example of how you might be able to identify where the English word came from is the
   plural of “man”, “man” also become plural with ER, give it a try “the man”
Student: Die Manner
Teacher: But the umlaut?
Student: Männer
Teacher: Die Männer, good. You added those two dots on A and you got “die Männer” which of course sounds more
   like “men”, no? In English we have “man“ and “men” then we can think, oh, ok, maybe that’s where “men”
   came from. You will find many connections like this in German and it will really aid your memory. So we’ve
   seen the ER plural, we also saw the E plural, we had “Hund” for dog, and “dogs” is?
Student: Hunde
Teacher: Hunde. The addition of this E could also add an umlaut. So for example “the hand” is “die Hand, die Hand”.
   “The hands”?
Student: Die Hände
Teacher: Good, die Hände. We add the umlaut here. “Die Wurst”, can you guess what that means, “die Wurst”?
Student: The sausage
Teacher: Yes! If you think of how it is spelled we have a W, W U R S T no? “Die Wurst” and when we make this plural
   with an E it will also add an umlaut so how would it sound?
Student: Würste
Teacher: Good, die Würste. The ambiguity that we mentioned of having a E for feminine and E for plural will often be
   cleared up for you by this umlaut. so if you find “Würste - Würste”, somewhere and you are not sure by the
   context whether it’s feminine o whether it’s plural, that umlaut, those two dots about the vowel can make
   you suspect at least that it’s plural.
Student: So we’ve seen how the addition of E can also ?? the addition of an umlaut so we have to bear that in mind,
   listen out for it and also know that it doesn’t always happen. For example, “the year” is “das Jahr”, that’s
   spelled J A H R and the H just stretches out that vowel, “das Jahr”. “The years” you will add an E to get this
   plural but we won’t add an umlaut. So, how would that sound, “the years”?
   Die J A H R
Teacher: Just walk ?? on the sound, Jahr
Student: Die Jahre
Teacher: Die Jahre. So we won’t always add an umlaut. You will notice patterns and we will mention them, about
   when you do and when you don’t but mostly is listening and noticing when you hear it happen. You might
   also have noticed that E is not very fuzzy about the gender of the word it is used for. We said that ER is
   usually with short neutral words but E, we’ve just seen, with “das Jahr” so “das Jahr” is neutral then we’ve
   “die Wurst” which is feminine, we also had “die Hand”, also feminine and “der Hund”, masculine, becoming
   “die Hunde”. So the E plural ending is not very fuzzy about what gender it goes with. Another important
   way of making plurals in German is by adding EN or just N if we are already finishing with a vowel sound.
   This doesn’t add umlaut so we don’t have to worry about adding the two dots when we add our EN or N. So
   we saw “die Katze”, we can’t add an E onto “die Katze”, we already have an E ending there, we saw that the
   ER is usually for just short neutral words so would lead us to the conclusion that the plural here must be
   with an N. So how would you say “the cats”?
Student: Die Katzen
Teacher: Die Katzen. “My cats”?
Student: Meine Katzen
Teacher: Meine Katzen. And we mentioned that if it ends in a vowel sound you will just add an N rather than a EN. So
   “die Katze - die Katzen”, “the cat - the cats” but this refers to vowel sounds rather than a vowel. “Die Frau”,
   the woman, spelled F R A U ends in a vowel but it doesn’t really end in a vowel sound, “die Frau”, it ends in
   a W “die Frau” so to say “the women” you will add EN. So we are working with sound here, if it ends in a
   consonant sound we want to add EN.
Student: Die Frauen
Teacher: Die Frauen. The word for “neighbour” was “Nachbar”, “der Nachbar“, this is spelled N A C H B A R, it ends in
   a consonant, it doesn’t sound like a consonant tho, sounds like an A, no? “Nachbar”. So in this case you will
   just add an N as if you are adding it onto a vowel. “The neighbours”?
Student: Die Nachbarn
Teacher: Die Nachbarn. So “Katzen - cats”, “Frauen - women”, “Nachbarn - neighbours” might look like verbs, no?
   Ending there in EN or N. German has a way to get around this in the writing. In spoken language we tend to
   worry about ambiguity much less, we have much more context in spoken language, but in the written
   language German tries to avoid any ambiguity that might arise here by writing nouns in capitals. Nouns are
   capitalised in German.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: Tell me again, what was the word for “neighbor”?
Student: Nachbar.
Teacher: This is “gh” to “ch”. So, we saw already “k” to “ch” (“make”/“machen”, “cook”/“kochen”) and
   English “gh” can also become German “ch” (“neighbor”/“Nachbar”). “Nicht” is actually like the
   English “naught”, another word for “zero”. We have the word “night”/“Nacht” in German. We
   have “laugh”...
   How do you think “to laugh” would be in German?
Student: Lachen.
Teacher: Lachen. Good.
Student: How would you say “my neighbor is so loud” (“loud” is the same word in German, which is
   spelled “laut”)?
Teacher: Mein Nachbar ist so laut.
Student: How would you say „my neighbor is too loud“?
Teacher: Mein Nachbar ist ZU laut.
Student: Good. „Nachbar“ actually means something like „towards building“. “Nach”, pronounced with a
   longer “a” when it stands alone means “towards” or “after” or “to” and “bauen” means “to
   build”. So “Nachbar” is the one who builds next to you.
Teacher: Do you remember how to make “Nachbar” plural? What pattern did it use?
Student: Nachbaren.
Teacher: Good, but we won’t add “en” because it already ends with a vowel sound, even though it is
   ending with an “r”.
Student: Nachbarn.
Teacher: Nachbarn.
Student: “My neighbors are good.” (The word for good is “gut”, and that “u” gives us a long “oo” sound,
   like in “food”.)
Teacher: Meine Nachbarn sind gut.
Student: Very good. So we had „sind“ for „are“.
Teacher: How would you say “we are”?
Student: Wir sind.
Teacher: “They are”?
Student: Sie sind.
Teacher: Good. And it is spelled “sind”, and again we have the hard version of the “d” sounding like a “t”.
   “Sind”.
Student: How was the word “child”?
Teacher: Kind.
Student: Again “kind”, but we hear it “t”. “Childhood” is “Kindheit”. So this “-heit” ending is like “-hood”
   in English, and it is used much more in German than in English. And “-heit” is a feminine ending,
   so whenever you find “-heit” at the end of the word, you understand this is a feminine ending
   and the word will take “die”.
Teacher: So how would you say “childhood”?
Student: Die Kindheit.
Teacher: And “my childhood”?
Student: Meine Kindheit.
Teacher: Very good. We’ve actually found another pattern here: “-heit” is spelled “h-e-i-t”, so going from
   the English “-hood” of “childhood” to the German “-heit” of “Kindheit”, we can see how the
   English “-d” is changed to a German “-t”. And we’ve actually seen it quite a few times already.
   I’ve mentioned the word “Kindergarten”. “Garten” is spelled “G-a-r-t-e-n”: English “garden”
   with the “d” to “t” shift. We’ve seen the word “Wort”, the word for “word”, which is spelled
   “W-o-r-t”. We saw “laut”, which is spelled “l-a-u-t”, “kalt”/“cold”, “gut”. The word “daughter”
   is “Tocher”, so we see a couple of changes there: we have the “d” to “t”, the “gh” to “ch” and
   we get “Tochter”. How do you think you would say “to drink”?
Student: Trinken.
Teacher: “Shoulder”. How do you think you would say “shoulder” in German?
Student: Schulter.
Teacher: You have to “ou” to “u” and the “d” to “t”: “Schulter”. “To dance” is “tanzen”. We have to “d”
   to “t” and we have that latin “c” again in “dance”, becoming “z”. I don’t know if you would’ve
   heard in English before “I bid you farewell”? “I bid” is the German word “bitten” – “to ask for”.
   You might have also come across the word “please” in German: “bitte”. It’s used like “please”:
   “Ich bitte”, but without the “ich” generally, just “bitte” – “please”. And that’s just “bid”, what
   we have in English: “I bid you.” And “farewell” actually means “to travel well”. So this is a very
   Germanic sentence now in English: “I bid you farewell”, because “to travel” is “fahren”. So, “to
   travel” or “to ride”, like “to ride a train” – “fahren”. So: “I bid you travel well”, “I bid you ride
   well” - “I bid you farewell”. So you could say, for example, “My neighbors are riding or traveling
   towards Berlin.” Let’s take it piece by piece.
Student: “My neighbors”
Teacher: Meine Nachbarn.
Student: “Are traveling / are riding”?
Teacher: Fahren.
Student: “Towards”? (We said that Nachbarn means like “towards or to + build”)
Teacher: Meine Nachbaren (Correction: Nachbarn) fahren nach Berlin.
Student: Good. So if we have „bitten“, “to ask” in the sense “to ask for”...
   How would you say “I’m asking for”, speaking informally?
Teacher: Ich bitte dich.
Student: Now you could also say „I’m asking you to come“.
Teacher: “I’m asking you (in order) to come”?
Student: Ich bitte dich zu kommen.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: “I’m asking you to stay”?
Teacher: Ich bitte dich zu bleiben.
Student: Good.
Teacher: “I’m asking you to stay here”?
Student: Ich bitte dich hier zu bleiben.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: “Are you asking me to go”, asking informally again? “Are you asking”, let’s start there, informally?
Teacher: Bittest du?
Student: Very good. You had to add “-est”. “Bitten”, we take off our “-en” and we get “bitt-”, but we
   can’t make “bittst” – we say “bittest”, like we saw with “warten” / “wartest” – “to wait” and
   “finden” / “findest” - “to find”. So “bittest du”...
Teacher: “Are you asking me to go”?
Student: Bittest du mich zu gehen?
Teacher: Very good.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: What is the word for „is“?
Student: ist.
Teacher: “It is”?
Student: Es ist.
Teacher: „She is“?
Student: Sie ist.
Teacher: “He is”?
Student: Er ist
Teacher: “He”, “she” and “it” in German use the same verb form. Like in English, we have an “s”. “He
   comes”, “she comes”,“It comes”, we add an “s” onto “to come”. But in German, we add a “t”.
   Just like we have in “ist”. “Ist” is “is” plus a “t”. “He is” – “Er ist”. “She is” – “Sie ist”. So, to
   bild verbs for “he/she/it” in German, we remove our ending from the “to” form. So let’s begin
   with “to come” first. What is “to come”?
Student: Kommen.
Teacher: We remove the “-en”, then we add a “t” and we get the form for “he/she and it”. So what
   would be “he is coming”?
Student: Er kommt.
Teacher: “She is staying here”?
Student: Sie bleibt hier.
Teacher: To visit was “besuchen”. Say: „he is visiting me”.
Student: Er besucht mich.
Teacher: Good. “He doesn’t understand anything“ / „He understands nothing“.
Student: Er versteht nix. (or: nichts)
Teacher: How would you say: „It stinks!“? What was “to stink”?
Student:  Stinken.
Teacher: “It stinks”?
Student: Es stinkt.
Teacher: What was “to smell”? (like the English “to reek”)
Student: Riechen. (without the hard “CH”!)
Teacher: If you want to say, for example, “It smells of soup”, you will use “nach” - “to soup”. “It smells
   TO soup”, which is quite literally, if you think about it: When you smell something, the smell is
   originating from somewhere, and leads you to that, no? So “it smells towards soup.” So how
   would that be? “It smells towards soup”?
Student: Es riecht (soft “ch”!) nach Suppe.
Teacher: So, we have the two different “ch” here, no? “Es riecht nach Suppe.” Good. What was „to do“ or
   „to make“?
Student: Machen.
Teacher: How would you say „it makes“?
Student: Es macht.
Teacher: How would you say “it makes nothing”?
Student: Es macht nichts. (or: “nix”)
Teacher: This is used like „it doesn’t matter“, which very interestingly is ideologically the same. If you
   think, “matter” refers to matter – stuff, things. When you say “es macht nichts”, you think “it
   makes nothing” – “there is no matter”, no? And then you have “it doesn’t matter”. That’s very
   interesting, how the idea behind those two expressions is extremely similar, but it’s said in a
   different way. “It doesn’t matter” – “Es macht nichts”. We saw “Machen”, for “to do” or “to
   make”, but we also have a word coming right from “to do”, so make your d-to-t-shift and then
   make it into a German verb. What does it sound like?
Student: Ta?
Teacher: We have “do”..
Student: Tun!
Teacher: Good, no? Delete “t” and then put an “en” to make it a verb in German – “tun”. So “Machen” is
   most commonly used to “to do” and “to make”, but “tun” is especially used in some kinds of
   expressions. For example, how would you say “it does”, using “tun”?
Student: Es tut.
Teacher: “Es tut mir leid” – means: “It does TO me” – “mir” means “to me”, so we have “mich” for “me”
   and “mir” for “to me”. “Es tut mir leid” – “It does to me suffering”, and this is a way of saying
   “sorry”. It’s much like the Spanish way: “lo siento” – by in Spanish saying “I feel it” you are
   demonstrating your empathy with “sorry”, and the same is happening here in German: “es tut
   mir leid” – “it does to me suffering”. So, “tun” is used very often in expressions like this. So, “es
   tut mir leid” means “I’m sorry”. How’d you say “are you sorry?” (talking informally) – “does it
   make to you suffering?”, if we have “mich” and “dich”, what do you think “to you” might be?
   “mich” – “mir”, “dich” – ...?
Student: Dir.
Teacher: Yes. “D-I-R”. Not “M-I-R”, “D-I-R”. “Mir” – “Dir”. So, “are you sorry?” – “does it do to you
   suffering?”
Student: Tut es dir leid?
Teacher: “Tut es dir leid?” – “Are you sorry?” Leid is spelled “L-E-I-D”, by the way. Another use of “tun” in
   such an expression would be to say that something hurts. If you were to say, for example, “my
   shoulder hurts”, you would say “my shoulder does aching”. “Meine Schulter”, that’s feminine,
   “meine Schulter tut weh” – “my shoulder does aching”. But generally speaking, you will use
   “Machen” for “to do” and “to make”.
German Track - Level: Intermediate 
Teacher: To shine, if you had to guess this word in German to shine – like the shining of the sun, the verb – how
   might it be?
Student: “scheinen”?
Teacher: Yes, scheinen of course. That’s spelt S-C-H-E-I-N-E-N. So S-C-H give us the “sh” - /ʃ/ sound. Scheinen -
   /ʃaɪnən/
Student: So scheinen is to shine and it’s also used like to seem. So if you wanted to say “it seems so” you’d say “It
   shines so.” – it’s almost the same word in German. How would that be?
Teacher: “Es scheinen so”?
Student: Good. But scheinen, you’d have to change that for es…
Teacher: Oh yeah. “Es scheint so”.
Student: Very good. “Es scheint so”. Or you could also hear “scheint so” – “seems so” just like in English. So in
   German, like in English, we need to include these words like it, he, she, but not always. We might hear an
   exception like “seems so” – “scheint so”.
Teacher: Erscheinen, so scheinen with -ER at the beginning, means to appear. So we add on-ER at the beginning of
   scheinen – to shine – and we get to appear. Erscheinen - /ɛʁʃaɪnən/
Student: “Erscheinen”.
Teacher: So how would you say “he appears”?
Student: “Er erscheinen”
Teacher: But think it through.
Student: Ah. “Er erscheint”
Teacher: Very good. So we don’t want to be confused by this repetition here. Now we have one er for he and the
   other one is what we are adding to scheinen to get a different meaning. And we will see that around in
   German. Er erscheint.
Student: And the -r after the vowel, like in er, it’s not really pronounced like an r in German, it’s more like a /ɛ/. You
   can even think of it as an E-A really. It’s like the -r on the end of car, that just kind of makes the vowel
   longer in English, caar. It’s much more like an extension of the vowel. Car - /kɑː/. And the r in German after
   a vowel is very similar - /ɛ/. Erscheinen.
Teacher: Erscheinen can also mean to come out, like a movie. Like a movie comes out, or a book. So the movie or the
   film is der Film. What gender is that? Film?
Student: “Masculine?”
Teacher: Good. Masculine. Der Film.
Student: Do you remember how to say soon in German? Bald. Good bald, B-A-L-D and we have that final -D sounding
   more like a -T. Bald - /balt/. So you could say something like “the movie is coming out soon”.
Teacher: The movie?
Student: “der film”
Teacher: …is coming out…?
Student: “ist”
Teacher: So, that’s all one word actually: is coming out = to come out
Student: “erscheinen”.
Teacher: Ok. So that’s what we need to go back to, the “to” form of the verb, and as long as we can identify that
   then we are able to manipulate it and we can feel confident about it. So we have der Film, then we have
   erscheinen.
Student: “erscheint”
Teacher: Soon?
Student: “bald”
Teacher: Good. Der Film erscheint bald. Good.
   If you know what you’re talking about, you can just say “IT’S coming out soon”. So here we are talking
   about der Film, so for it we want to use a masculine word, so we can actually use der or er. We can refer to
   the movie as er - he or der – which is of course just the masculine word for the or this. So how would you
   say that? “It’s coming out soon” and we mean the movie. So we are not using es any more for it if we know
   we mean der Film.
Student: “Der erscheint bald.”
Teacher: Good. Der erscheint bald. Or, er erscheint bald.
Student: So er is something else you might find at the beginning of verbs, changing their meanings, and you don’t
   want to confuse that with the word for he.
Teacher: For example, another verb we can use this with – the verb for to clarify/clear up/sort out/resolve is klären.
   That’s K-L-Ä-R-E-N. Klären - /klɛːʁən/. So this is like to clear.
   How is, we must or we have to?
Student: “Wir müssen?”
Teacher: Good, so we have the U with the umlaut. Ü - / yː/. Müssen - mʏsən.
   How would you say, “We have to sort it out/ we have to clear it”?
Student: “Wir müssen es klären.”
Teacher: Wir müssen es klären. Good. Wir müssen es klären.
   Erklären, so klären with ER- at the beginning, erklären, means to explain. So the difference between
   meaning that this er- now gives us between scheinen (to shine) and erscheinen (to come out or to appear
   like a movie) or klären (to clear) and erklären (to explain), is a little bit random.
   Just like VER-. We saw that ver- as used in stehen and verstehen (changing stand to understand) or kaufen
   and verkaufen (buy to sell) occasions quite a random change in meaning. And the same with ER-. We can
   see that between scheinen/erscheinen and klären/erklären. So erklären = to explain.
   How would you say “Can you explain it to me?”. And in German we keep that same order “…it to me.” “Can
   you explain it to me.”
Student: “Kannst du es mich erklaren…erklären.”
Teacher: Good, but mich, is me, but here we actually want to me. How was to me.
Student: “Mir.”
Teacher: M-I-R. Mir - /miːɐ/.
   So let’s do that again. “Can you explain it to me?” – “Can you it, to me, explain?”
Student: “Kannst du es mir erklären?”
Teacher: Very good. “Kannst du es mir erklären?” Good.
German Track - Level: Intermediate 
Teacher: What was to buy?
Student: Kaufen.
Teacher: Kaufen. And buy now have past.
Student: Gekauft.
Teacher: Gekauft. To make?
Student: Machen.
Teacher: Machen. And made as in I have made?
Student: Gemacht
Teacher: Gemacht. You remember to wait?
Student: Warten.
Teacher: W-A-R-T-E-N. If you want to say he waits, you can’t add the -t of he/she/it on to the t- of wart- once you
   take of your –en, no? So to help you do that you’re going to add an e in between there. Wartet. Wartet. So
   he waits?
Student: Er wartet.
Teacher: Good and if you say he’s waiting for me, you would say he’s waiting on me in German - auf mich. So how
   would you say that – he’s waiting for me?
Student: Er wartet auf mich.
Teacher: Very good. Er wartet auf mich. And he has waited for me.
Student: Er hat auf mich gewartet.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Er hat auf mich gewartet. Very good. To cost is kosten. Kosten.
   Kosten.
Student: How would you say it costs?
Teacher: Es kost-et. Kostet.
Student: Good. Very good. You realised that you put the t on in your mind but you can’t hear it, no? So you need the
   extra e to actually hear it. Es kostet. Good. How was the word for how, how in German. You can think of
   how goes it?
Teacher: Wie geht’s? Wie.
Student: Wie. Good. How much is wie viel. Wie viel.
Teacher: Wie viel.
Student: Viel is spelt V-I-E-L, V-I-E-L and of course the V gives us an F sound like in verstehen to undertand. Viel. So
   wie viel is how much. Wie viel? How much?
Teacher: Wie viel?
Student: How would you say how much does it cost?
Teacher: Wie viel es kostet?
Student: Good. But it’s a question, no? How do we construct a question in German?
Teacher: ...kostet es.
Student: Good. So we start with how much...
Teacher: Wie viel...
Student: Good, and then we get to the verb construction and that’s what we need to invert when we make a
   question.
Teacher: Wie viel kostet es?
Student: Good how much costs is? This is what we say in German. How much costs it? Wie viel kostet es? How much
   did it cost? How much has it cost?
Teacher: Wie viel hat es gekostet?
Student: Very good. Wie viel hat es gekostet. Very good. What was the word for what?
Teacher: Was.
Student: Was. What have you done? Or, what did you do?
Teacher: Was hast du gemacht?
Student: Good. Was hast du gemacht? What was to say? If you don’t have it from memory yet from having used it, in
   its early days (we only saw it breifly), you can look at the consonant shift, no? So we have a y in say, what
   might that become in German?
   g
Teacher: And then whats the next step to making that a verb?
Student: en
Teacher: Ok. Now start practicing it and see what happens.
Student: Sagen.
Teacher: Ok. Sagen. Good - to say. So how would you say, what did they tell you, what did they say to you, what
   have they said to you? So lets start with what..
Student: Was...
Teacher: ...have they...
Student: ...haben sie...
Teacher: ...haben sie, here English inverts like in German, no? We have they have and then what have they. So
   English inverts just like German here. What have they said to you?
Student: Was haben sie –it’s not mir, to me, it’s to you, so - dir – errr said in the past... – gesagt?
Teacher: Very good. Was haben sie dir gesagt. How was how?
Student: How – I don’t know
Teacher: You can find it in another way no? How goes it
Student: Wie gehts?
Teacher: So how is how?
Student: Wie.
Teacher: Wie so you have it no? And how was how much?
Student: Wie viel?
Teacher: Very good. So if wie viel is how much, how do you say much by itself?
Student: Viel.
Teacher: Viel how would you say so much?
Student: So viel.
Teacher: So viel. Why did it cost so much? Why has it cost so much?
Student: Warum hat es so viel gekostet?
Teacher: Very good. Warum hat es so viel gekostet. So mostly we can get this have past by going from the he/she/it
   version of the verb and sticking this ge- at the beginning. But we have quite a few irregular forms and we
   already saw a couple that look like English versions of the verb, no? Gebracht, like braught. And verstanden
   –understood. Like understand but used like understood. cih habe verstanden. I have understood. Another
   one from to find. Do you remember to find?
Student: Finden.
Teacher: Finden I have found? Found is gefunden. So it’s just like found with the ge-. Gefunden.
Student: Gefunden.
Teacher: Gefunden. We found it?
Student: Wir haben es gefunden.
Teacher: Good. Wir haben es gefunden. What was to see?
Student: Sehen.
Teacher: I have seen. Again, the irregularity is very much like the English. Seen becomes gesehen. So it’s like seen in I
   have seen, with ge-. So I have seen?
Student: Ich habe gesehen.
Teacher: Ich habe gesehen. So its it’s like the to form, S-E-H-E-N with th G-E in the front. Ich habe gesehen. What is
   the word for she?
Student: Sie.
Teacher: Sie. This is also the word for her. I saw her?
Student: Ich hab sie gesehen.
Teacher: Ich hab sie gesehen. Ich habe sie gesehen. And how would you say I’ve seen them?
Student: Ich hab sie gesehen.
Teacher: Good. The same, no? Ich habe sie gesehen. Ich hab sie gesehen. The word for him is ihn. Ihn.
Student: Ihn.
Teacher: That is I-H-N, him, ihn.
Student: Ihn.
Teacher: Very good. So the H there stretches the I. We don’t want to say in, but ihn. I’ve seen him. I saw him.
Student: Ich hab ihn gesehen.
Teacher: Ich habe ihn gesehen. What was the word for yesterday?
Student: Ge- something.
Teacher: Go from yesterday, no? You don’t need to be certain before we start a road. So we can start the road of
   changing the y to g in yesterday.
   Gesterday.
Student: Ok gesterday. It doesn’t bring you to the word in German?
Teacher: Gestern!
Student: Gestern.
Teacher: Gestern.
Student: Now if you start yesterday- gesterday – ok Gerstern. It will bring you there. Ok good.
Teacher: I saw him yesterday?
Student: Ich hab ihn gestern gesehen.
Teacher: Ich hab ihn gestern gesehen. I saw him yesterday, I have seen him yesterday. Very good.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: What was the word for she?
Student: Sie.
Teacher: And the word for her?
Student: Sie.
Teacher: Good. So sie doesn’t change. And that’s also the case for when it means they, no? Sie is they and also them.
   What was the word for he?
Student: Er.
Teacher: Good. Er. And him?
Student: Ihn.
Teacher: Ihn. Good. The word for - for, as in I made it for him - is für. Für.
Student: Für.
Teacher: So how would you say, Imade it for him. I have made it for him?
Student: Ich hab es für ihn gemacht.
Teacher: Good. Ich habe es für ihn gemacht. I have made it for him. I have it, for him, made. So we saw that we had
   machen -to do or to make. And then to close, was to to make, to make to. How was that?
Student: Zumachnen.
Teacher: Zumachen good. And to open – do you remember how was to open?
Student: Aufmachen.
Teacher: Aufmachen. Good. We had also to turn on. The word for on in German was an. So to on turn was?
Student: Anmachen.
Teacher: Anmachen. What was to to search. Do you remember to search?
Student: Suchen
Teacher: Suchen. Good. And to try? Which we built from to search.
Student: Versuchen.
Teacher: Versuchen. Good. And to visit?
Student: Besuchen
Teacher: Besuchen. How would you say I want to visit him?
Student: Ich will ihn besuchen.
Teacher: Good. Ich will ihn besuchen. To pick out, is to out search. So how is out?
Student: Aussachen – aussuchen.
Teacher: Aussuchen. Now these verbs that we build from other verbs, no? So we start with for example suchen and
   we build versuchen, besuchen, aussuchen, we start with machen and we build zumachen, aufmachen,
   anmachen and so on. These verbs that we build, when we use them not in their to form – not in their to
   form- some of them split. For example how would you say I’m doing it tomorrow.
Student: Ich mache es morgen.
Teacher: Good. Ich mache es morgen. Now if you were to say for example I’m opening it tomorrow. I’m opening it
   tomorrow. When it’s not to open, aufmachen splits. Now when aufmachen splits and we’re left with
   machen and auf what is auf? It’s still a verb – or still part of a verb. No? So when that verb splits, it’s like
   again, like we have 2 verbs and that auf is going to go right to the end. So how would you say that? I’m
   opening it tomorrow?
Student: Ich mach es morgen auf.
Teacher: Good. Ich mach – ich mache- es morgen auf. So this is another great example of how German saves the
   picture right to the end. Because the person that’s hearing that is understanding I will do it tomorrow until
   they hear auf and that changes the whole meaning to ill open it tomorrow. We could have ich mache es
   morgen zu. What does that mean? Ich mache es morgen zu?
Student: Close.
Teacher: Yeah. I will close it tomorrow. So you understand I’ll do it tomorrow until you hear zu right on the end.
   What was to search?
Student: Suchen.
Teacher: Suchen. To try?
Student: Versuchen.
Teacher: Versuchen. How is I try or I’m trying?
Student: Ich versuche.
Teacher: Ich versuche. So here it doesn’t split. Here versuche stays whole. So sometimes this happens – sometimes
   we have this split – and sometimes we don’t. And there’s a really easy way to know when you should do it.
   If the bit we add to the verb to change is meaning is a word that you can use in its own right – we saw that
   aufmachen was to open and I mentioned briefly that we can also say es ist auf to mean that is is open – auf
   is something that we can use in its own right. So when aufmachen is not in its to form that is going to split.
   But ver- doesn’t mean anything by itself. So for that reason it stays put. Versuche. I try – I’m trying. How
   was to understand?
Student: Verstehen
Teacher: Verstehen. Verstehen. How do you say I understand?
Student: Ich verstehe.
Teacher: Ich verstehe. You will never hear ich stehe ver. This will not split off because it’s not a word in its own right.
   But you might be asking yourself well how am I supposed to know what is a word in its own right at this
   stage of my German, no? Well there’s a very easy rule for that as well. If the bit that we add to the verb to
   change its meaning takes the accent, then it’s a word in its own right. So let’s see this with an example. To
   search. Give me that again.
Student: Suchen.
Teacher: Suchen. How is to try?
Student: Versuchen.
Teacher: Versuchen. Where is the accent?
Student: Suchen.
Teacher: Good it’s not on ver because ver is not a word in its own right and it is going to stay put. Ich versuche. How
   is to visit?
Student: Besuchen.
Teacher: Where is the accent?
Student: Suchen
Teacher: So be- is a word in its own right and its going to stay put. So how do you say I’m visiting him tomorrow?
Student: Ich besuche ihn morgen.
Teacher: Ich besuche ihn morgen. How was to pick out - to out search?
Student: Aussuchen.
Teacher: Aussuchen. Does this take the accent?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: It’s because it’s a word in its own right. So here when we are using a word outside of its to form that is
   going to split off and its going to act like we have two verbs. So now we have aus and suchen and it’s going
   to go to the end. So if you say something like I’m picking it out tomorrow – I’ll pick it out tomorrow, how
   would that be?
Student: Ich suche es morgen aus.
Teacher: Very good. Ich suche es morgen aus. So until you get to aus, what you understand is I’m searching for it
   tomorrow, I’ll look for it tomorrow. Aus – now I’ll pick it out tomorrow. So this is why you really must listen
   to the end in German to understand what is going on. What was to come?
Student: Kommen.
Teacher: Kommen. You remember to arrive? It means to come on.
Student: Ankommen.
Teacher: Ankommen. Would this verb split?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Why?
Student: Because the accent is on the an.
Teacher: Good. And an is its own word. So how would you say, I’m arriving tomorrow?
   Ich kommen morgen an.
Student: Good. You were so concentrated on the an that you forgot to change kommen.
Teacher: Ich komme morgen an.
Student: Good. Ich komme morgen an. But if the verb is in its to form you leave it as it is, ankommen. So if you say
   for example I want to arrive tomorrow.
Teacher: Ich will morgen ankommen.
Student: Ich will morgen ankommen. Good. How would you say we want to arrive tomorrow?
Teacher: Wir wollen morgen ankommen.
Student: Very good. Wir wollen morgen ankommen. Good. We want to arrive tomorrow. Now, when you say we’re
   arriving tomorrow and you have one verb, even though we use the to form, let’s say, for we and they it’s
   not really the to from any more is it? We say, we arrive. It’s we now. So it’s still going to split. We arrive
   tomorrow? We’re arriving tomorrow?
Teacher: Wir kommen morgen an.
Student: Very good. Wir kommen morgen an. Good. They’re arriving tomorrow?
Teacher: Sie kommen morgen an.
Student: Very good. Sie kommen mogen an.
German Track - Level: Intermediate
Teacher: What was to do or to make?
Student: Machen.
Teacher: Machen. And to turn on, to on make
Student: Anmachen
Teacher: Anmachen, good. And that’s with A-N, no, anmachen. How would you say, can you turn it on?
Student: Kannst du es anmachen?
Teacher: Good. Kannst du es anmachen? Good. How would you say I’m turning it on.
Student: Ich anmache es.
Teacher: Now when you put that stress on anmache, maybe it reminds you….yes.
Student: I’m supposed to split it.
Teacher: Good, ok.
Student: Ich mache es an.
Teacher: Good. Ich mache es an. So anmachen is a verb built from machen. The stress is on an, which shows us it’s a
   word in its own right, so when it’s not in the to form – like kannst du es anmachen- can you turn it on –
   when it’s not in that to form, then we’re going to split it. Ich mache es an. How was to search?
Student: Suchen.
Teacher: Good. And to try?
Student: Versuchen.
Teacher: Versuchen. I’m trying?
Student: Ich versuche.
Teacher: Ich versuche. If we want to say I tried – these verbs that have a ver- or something at the beginning that
   doesn’t move, no, like in ich versuche, it doesn’t move - it’s not going to move for the ge- of the past,
   either. So if you want to say, for example, I have tried. Tried is versucht. So we have the -t no, like the he,
   she and it form, but we don’t have the ge- at the beginning. The ver- refused to move for it, so we just
   don’t have it. So versucht. For tried. So I have tried, or I tried?
Student: Versucht.
Teacher: Good. But we need the whole construction no, for I tried or I have tried.
Student: Ich hab versucht.
Teacher: Ich hab versucht. So whether we mean I tried or I have tried in spoken German it’s ich habe versucht. How
   was to visit?
Student: Besuchen.
Teacher: Besuchen good. How would you say, I visited him – I have visited him?
Student: Ich hab ihn besucht.
Teacher: Very good, ich hab ihn besucht. So again the be- doesn’t move, so it’s not going to get out the way for a ge-
   so we just have a -t for the past. Ich habe ihn besucht. What was to buy?
Student: Kaufen.
Teacher: Kaufen. And to sell?
Student: Verkaufen.
Teacher: Verkaufen. Have you sold it?
Student: Hast du es verkauft?
Teacher: Very good. Hast du es verkauft? Or you could also hear with the contraction – Hast dus - du es, the
   contraction of du es, dus - Hast dus verkauft? Good. Why haven’t you bought it yet? What was why?
Student: Warum.
Teacher: Warum, good. Why haven’t you bought it yet?
Student: Warum hast du es noch nicht gekauft?
Teacher: Very good. Warum hast du es noch nicht gekauft? Why haven’t you bought it yet? So with these
   unmovables, no, like versuchen, besuchen, we just had a -t on the end. But, if we have a verb like
   anmachen, aufmachen, zumachen, where this auf, this zu, this an is a word in its own right so its movable,
   then what we get for our past is angemacht, all one word and an- moves to make way for that ge-. So the
   past of to turn on is angemacht. So that an- moves for the ge-. Angemacht – turned on, as in I have turned
   on.
Student: Angemacht.
Teacher: So how would you say, I have turned them on. I have turned them on.
Student: Ich hab sie angemacht.
Teacher: Good. Ich habe sie angemaht. Have they opened?
Student: Haben sie angemacht?
Teacher: Opened. What is to open?
Student: Aufgemacht.
Teacher: Good. Have they opened?
Student: Haben sie aufgemacht? Good. Today is heute. Heute. H-E-U….and we’ve seen how eu gives us oi in
   german… T-E. Heute.
Teacher: Heute.
Student: Have they opened today?
Teacher: Haben sie heute aufgemacht?
Student: Very good. Haben sie heute aufgemacht. Have they opened today? Why haven’t they opened yet today.
   Haha. So just start with what comes first and then after that what should I put now, no? So the whole idea
   is: Why haven’t they opened yet today? What do we start with?
Teacher: Warum haben sie heute noch nicht aufgemacht ?
Student: Very good. Warum haben sie heute noch nicht aufgemacht? Very good.
Teacher: What was to search?
Student: Suchen.
Teacher: Suchen. And to pick out?
Student: Aussuchen.
Teacher: Aussuchen. Good. So how would you say, have you chosen?
Student: Hast du aussuchen? …Hast du aussucht?
Teacher: So does aus move ?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: So it will move for that ge-.
Student: Hast du ausgesucht?
Teacher: Hast du ausgesucht? Have you chosen it?
Student: Hast du es augesucht?
   Good. Hast du es ausgesucht? And how would that be with the contraction?
Teacher: Hast du es ausgesucht?
Student: Very good. Hast du es ausgesucht.
