Spanish Track 1
Teacher: English and Spanish are two related languages. English is considered a Germanic language,
   but it’s kind of half Latin. We have a huge amount of Latin vocabulary in English and this Latin
   vocabulary we can convert it over to Spanish really easily because Spanish is practically Modern
   Latin.
   Whoever said Latin is a dead language lied. Just in the same way that Greek is a modern version
   of ancient Greek, Spanish is like a modern version of Latin. It's actually a street Latin that became
   Spanish. So we can identify Latin words in English, and we can, with just some rule or other,
   convert them over to Spanish, and this will give us around 3,000 words, I didn't count them, but
   there are around 3,000 words. So for example, one of these rules is that words ending in -al tend
   to come from Latin, so we can make them Spanish. So to give you an example, normal in Spanish
   is normal.
Student: Normal.
Teacher: Normal, good. What do you notice different between normal and normal?
Student: Well, the accent.
Teacher: What do you mean by the accent?
Student: Well the …, well where the sound is stressed, with which vowel it’s stressed.
Teacher: Where’s it stressed in English?
Student: On the o.
Teacher: Good. At the beginning, right? NORmal, NORmal, and in Spanish we’re stressing the end,
   right? NorMAL.
Student: NorMAL.
Teacher: So if we assume the same happens with other words, how do you think you would say metal?
   Metal:
Student: Metal.
Teacher: Metal. To get a perfect accent in Spanish we just need to pronounce all of the vowels exactly
   as they are written so a, e, i, o, u in Spanish is /ah/, /eh/, /ee/, /oh/, /oo/, where in English the vowel,
   it can have many different sounds. Like if you look at the a sound in apple or in mare, it's a very
   different sound. But a in Spanish is always going to be /ah/, e is always going to be /eh/. So if you
   pronounce the vowels as they're written, not this kind of uh-uh-uh English vowels that we get, then
   we get a perfect Spanish accent.
Student: NorMAL, MeTAL.
Teacher: Perfect. So we can begin to make sentences with this already. The word for is in Spanish is
   es, e-s.
Student: Es.
Teacher: Es. And this also means it is, she is, he is, or even you are, talking to somebody formally.
   So now we can say he is normal, she is normal:
Student: Es normal.
Teacher: Yeah, Es normal. And you pronounced an s which is excellent. English speakers should
   beware that maybe they feel themselves pronouncing a z, because many times we have an s in
   English like in the word is, and we pronounce a z. So you might find slipping out a /z/, but this is
   incorrect--you should be careful to pronounce an s. S. Es normal. Good, how would you say legal?
Student: Legal.
Teacher: Yeah, legal. So how would you say it is legal?
Student: Es legal.
Teacher: Es legal. Illegal?
Student: Ilegal.
Teacher: Ilegal, good. So here in English we have an i and an e producing the same sound, “illegal”.
   The i and the e are producing the same sound, so this is really confusing if you want to learn
   English. But in Spanish you're not going to have this problem. The i is like in ink and the e is like
   in elephant. Ilegal. Ilegal. So, it is illegal:
Student: Es ilegal.
Teacher: Good. Es ilegal. What if you wanted to say he is liberal? You don't need the word for he if
   you know who you’re talking about, you can just use es.
Student: Es liberal.
Teacher: Yeah, es liberal. Now Spanish is much more phonetic than English; what that means is that
   the letters are going to represent the same sound, where English has a million rules and a million
   exceptions to those rules. I mean it's really hard even for native English speakers often to
   understand how to pronounce a new word when they see it written; but you're not going to have
   that problem in Spanish. So you know natural and you don't just want to just change the accent
   and say natuRAL; this is not Spanish. You want to think “how is it written?” and pronounce the
   letters as they are. So how do you think you would say natural in Spanish?
Student: Natural.
Teacher: Natural, good. That’s a t, so you pronounce a t. A is like /ah/, u is like /oo/: natural. Very
   good, and the accent on the end as well. It's natural?
Student: Es natural.
Teacher: Es Natural. If you want to say it isn't or it’s not, the word for not or don't is the same as the
   word for no. And the word for no in Spanish is the same as the word for no in English, but you
   pronounce it like in Spanish. So how do you think you say no in Spanish?
Student: No.
Teacher: No. Good. And you put this before is if you want to say it is not, he is not, she is not, you
   (formal) are not. So how would that sound, it is not?
Student: No es.
Teacher: No es, good. So now we can say things like it's not normal:
Student: No es normal.
Teacher: No es normal. How would you say ideal? So really think about how it's spelled and try and
   pronounce each of those vowels as they're written. I like ink, e like elephant, a like apple.
Student: Ideal.
Teacher: Good. Ideal. How would you say it’s ideal?
Student: Es ideal.
Teacher: Es ideal. It’s not ideal:
Student: No es ideal.
Teacher: Good. No es ideal. Perfect. How would you say fatal?
Student: Fatal.
Teacher: Fatal. Good. Natal:
Student: Natal.
Teacher: Natal, good. Colonial:
Student: Colonial.
Teacher: Colonial. Cultural:
Student: Culturial?
Teacher: So think about how it’s written.
Student: Cultural?
Teacher: Yes and perfect Spanish accent there. Cultural, very nice. Annual:
Student: Anual.
Teacher: Anual. And you cut this y sound that comes in English ann-y-ual. This y sound comes from
   nowhere in English and you cut it out ’cause you focused on how it’s written. Anual. Very nice.
   Dental:
Student: Dental.
Teacher: Tooth in Spanish is diente. So this is coming from dental. So if you look up tooth in the
   dictionary and you find diente, rather than treating it as a random piece of vocabulary that you
   have to memorize, you can relate it back to dental. Oh okay, like dental it comes from there. And
   this is useful for memory. A couple more: festival:
Student: Festival.
Teacher: Personal:
Student: Personal.
Teacher: Personal. Good, total:
Student: Total.
Teacher: Total. Good, verbal:
Student: Verbal.
Teacher: Verbal. So if we wanted to say verb, we might not have a rule to convert that word over.
   But if we know verbal is verbal, we can guess that the verb is probably going to be the same in
   Spanish. And most of the time words are either the same that we don’t have a rule, maybe we need
   to stick an o or an e or an a on the end. So we can make a guess. How do you think you say verb
   in Spanish?
Student: Verbo?
Teacher: Yeah, that’s right. So with structure, with the building, when we’re going to be making
   sentences with these words, we don’t ever want to guess. We want to take our time and think it
   through. But with vocabulary, we can happily guess and try. Imagine we said verba for example,
   and they would look at us funny and they would go “ah verbo” and when that person says “ah,
   verbo” then we learn “oh ok this is the right word”. And it’s the best way to learn quickly.
Spanish Track 3
Teacher: So what was is or he is, she is, it is?
Student: Es.
Teacher: Es. Good, we can use this with some other convertible words as well to make sentences. Another
   rule for these convertible words is that words in English that end -ant or -ent, most of them we can
   just stick an e on the end and they become Spanish. So for example, important becomes
   importante. Importante. Where is the stress there?
Student: In the second last.
Teacher: Good. The stress is as much part of the word as the sounds, which is why we want to get into the
   habit of just processing where is the accent, not trying to memorize it, just looking where it is.
   Not trying to memorize it, just oberserving it. How would you say it is important?
Student: Es importante.
Teacher: Es importante. It's not important:
Student: No es importante.
Teacher: No es importante. How would you say different?
Student: Diferente?
Teacher: Diferente. It's not different:
Student: No es diferente.
Teacher: Good, no es diferente. How would you say constant? Constant:
Student: Constante.
Teacher: Yeah, constante. How would you say it is constant?
Student: Es constante.
Teacher: Es constante. If you add on -mente, -mente, this sound you get: -ly in English. If you want to say
   constantly you can say constantemente, and it's one word, constantemente.
Student: Constantemente.
Teacher: Good, so how would you say legally?
Student: Legalmente.
Teacher: Perfect, legalmente. Good, Illegally:
Student: Ilegalmente.
Teacher: Ilegalmente. How do you think you say real in Spanish? Real:
Student: Real.
Teacher: Real. Good, when we have an r at the beginning you might hear it like a rolling r. Real. How do
   you think you would say really?
Student: Realmente.
Teacher: Realmente. Real also means royal. Like Real Madrid is not, you know, real Madrid, it's Royal
   Madrid. How would you say normally?
Student: Normalmente.
Teacher: Good, normalmente. So what would it mean if I said to you normalmente es importante?
   Normalmente es importante, what does that mean?
Student: Normally, as in usually, it's important.
Teacher: Very good, this is true. You actually use normally like usually. Normalmente es importante.
   Now if we have a /j/ sound, a /j/ sound, in a convertible word so we're not working with the letter
   g, we're working with the sound here, we're thinking about the sound. If we have a /j/ sound in a
   convertible word, this /j/ is going to become /kh/ in Spanish. Now if you know how to say
   Argentina for example in Spanish, Argentina, if you've heard that anywhere, this is a good hook
   to remember this rule. If we have a /j/ sound it's going to become /kh/ as a sound. This doesn't
   mean any g. For example how would you say global?
Student: Global.
Teacher: Global. Globally:
Student: Globalmente.
Teacher: Globalmente. So it's not a g, it's the /j/ sound. General is going to become?
Student: General.
Teacher: Very good, general. So we're causing a bit of friction in the throat, general. Generally:
Student: Generalmente.
Teacher: Generalmente. Good. Original:
Student: Original.
Teacher: Original. Originally:
Student: Originalmente.
Teacher: Good, originalmente. Digital:
Student: Digital.
Teacher: Digital. Good, naturally:
Student: Naturalmente.
Teacher: Good. How would you say naturally it's original?
Student: Naturalmente es original.
Teacher: Good. So naturalmente, you can also use it a little bit like obviously, something like that. Words
   ending -ible or -able, we can also convert many of them. We just have to pronounce them syllable
   by syllable and put the accent second from the end. So possible becomes posible.
Student: Posible.
Teacher: Probable:
Student: Probable?
Teacher: Yeah, probable. How would you say probably?
Student: Probablemente.
Teacher: Yeah, probablemente. Possibly:
Student: Posiblemente.
Teacher: Good. Possibly it's original:
Student: Posiblemente es original.
Teacher: Good. Posiblemente es original. Flexible:
Student: Flexible.
Teacher: Flexible. Good. So you can't do this - like if you say doable for example, you know. It's when the
   -able or -ible is really part of the word you will probably be able to do this. Some of these rules
   are more useful than others, some of these rules have more exceptions than others. We want to just
   get in the habit of identifying them and then getting this sense of what words in English are from
   Latin, and which ones we can experiment with converting over to Spanish. Now, this gives us over
   3,000 words, and there are enough words to be very conversational. So we want to feel free to
   experiment with the vocabulary, but at the same time we don't want to feel restricted by the fact
   that we might find an exception or we might use one that doesn't work. And feeling comfortable
   about that possibility of making that error is what really allows you to learn quickly.
   Because with this experimentation, you find very quickly the words that you can use.
 Spanish Track 4
Teacher: How would you say urgent?
Student: Urgente.
Teacher: Good, Urgente. Urgente. How would you say urgently?
Student: Urgentemente.
Teacher: Urgentemente. I love you in Spanish is te quiero, literally I want you. You might have also heard
  te amo. You should be wary of this difference. Te quiero you can use with friends, you can use
  with lovers very soon. Te amo is much much more serious but te quiero is very common and it
  literally means I want you. So te is you, we can get rid of this and here we are left with I want.
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. Good, how would you say I don’t want?
Student: No quiero.
Teacher: No quiero. Good, we just put no before. One of my favourite rules for convertible words is the
  rule for words ending -ion. This is an extremely useful rule. Words ending -ion are the same in
  English and Spanish, just in Spanish they have the accent on the end. So for example, in English
  we have opinion, and in Spanish you are going to pronounce syllable by syllable, making sure that
  you are pronouncing the vowels as they are written and you are going to put the accent on the end.
Student: Opinión.
Teacher: Opinión. Good, passion?
Student: Pasión.
Teacher: Pasión. Good! And you pronounced an s because we don’t want /sh/. Preparation? Now if
  it’s -tion, t-i-o-n, if we have -tion, it’s going to be c-i-o-n in Spanish. And this c-i-o-n is pronounced
  /ción/ like an s in most of the Spanish-speaking world, or in most of Spain it's pronounced /thion/.
  So you can choose, if you have a particular affiliation for Spain you can make this /th/. If not, I
  suggest using the /s/ sound because the majority of Spanish speakers are using this sound and it’s
   also much easier. It doesn’t appear difficult here: preparación, but if you want to ask for a beer
   for example with the /s/ sound you are going to ask for a /cervesa/, if you are going to ask using
   the /th/ sound you are going to ask for a /cervetha/. So, I would suggest unless you have a particular
   affiliation with Spain or you particularly want to be practicing with some Spanish friends or
   whatever to use the /s/ sound. So you have a word like organization, that z as well is going to sound
   like an s or a /th/. /Or-ga-ni-tha-thión/, so you see, much easier, then this is /or-ga-ni-sa-ción/.
Student: Organización.
Teacher: Good. Preparation:
Student: Preparación.
Teacher: Generation:
Student: Genaración.
Teacher: Generación.
Student: Generación.
Teacher: Good. We had a little bit slipping in from English, one of the vowels there, but if you take it syllable
   by syllable we get every vowel perfect. Generación:
Student: Generación.
Teacher: Confirmation:
Student: Confirmación.
Teacher: Confirmación.
Student: I was tempted to say confermación.
Teacher: Ah! But you thought “no, I, like ink.” This is actually called “language transfer”, so this is negative
   language transfer. Things that come from English affecting your Spanish which are not part of
   Spanish, are negative language transfer. And what is useful from English like these convertible
   words that we are using, as far as language learning is concerned, this is positive language transfer.
   So part of our journey here is to identify what is negative language transfer and what is positive
   language transfer and using both to our advantage. And English becomes more interesting when
  we learn Spanish because we start to see where some words come from, where is the inherent
  wisdom in the vocabulary. So confirmation for example means with signing. Con is with in
  Spanish and firma is signature. So when you confirm you are doing it “with signature”.
  Conversation:
Student: Conversación.
Teacher: Good. And this means “with verses”, “with verse”. Confrontation:
Student: Confrontación.
Teacher: Confrontación. And front actually, like in frontación, comes from frente which means forehead.
  So it’s “with the forehead”, when you confront you go forward with the forehead. Complication:
Student: Complicación.
Teacher: Complicación. Here com- is also con- but it changes to an m because of that p. It happens the
  same in English and Spanish. Complicación. But this is “with folding” from Latin, plicare, to
  fold. You know when you fold stuff up I guess it gets more complicated or something like that.
  The reason why this is my favourite rule is because out of these words ending -ion, if you take the
  words that end –ation, if you take those words and you get rid of the –tion and you put an r on the
  end you get the verb. Let me give you an example. Preparation, preparación, preparar.
  And there you get the verb to prepare. So there is like 1,000 verbs now we know in Spanish.
  What was generation?
Student: Generación.
Teacher: Good. What is to generate?
Student: Generar.
Teacher: Generar. Good, what was confirmation?
Student: Confirmación… Confirmación.
Teacher: Good. What is to confirm?
Student: Confirmar.
Teacher: Yes, Confirmar. So if you had to guess, how do you think you would say to sign? If to confirm is
  “with signing”:
Student: Oh, firmar.
Teacher: Yes! Firmar. Firmar means to sign. Complication:
Student: Complicación.
Teacher: To complicate:
Student: Complicar.
Teacher: Good. So now we can make some sentences with these. What was again I want? And if we forget
  that we can think of I love you in Spanish and then take away the you.
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. So now we can make some sentences. I want to prepare:
Student: Quiero preparar.
Teacher: Good, quiero preparar. How do you say cooperation?
Student: Cooperación.
Teacher: Good, cooperación. Good, you pronounced both o's, that was correct. Cooperación. It just sounds
  a tiny bit longer, cooperación. To cooperate:
Student: Cooperar.
Teacher: Cooperar. I want to cooperate:
Student: Quiero cooperar.
Teacher: Good! How do you say cancellation?
Student: Cancelación.
Teacher: And to cancel:
Student: Cancelar.
Teacher: I want to cancel:
Student: Quiero cancelar.
Teacher: Good. How do you think you would say I don’t want to cancel?
Student: No quiero cancelar.
Teacher: Perfect, exploration:
Student: Exploración.
Teacher: To explore:
Student: Explorar.
Teacher: Good. I want to explore:
Student: Quiero explorar.
Teacher: Perfect. The word for me in Spanish is the same as English. You are just going to pronounce it how
   it’s written.
Student: Me.
Teacher: Me, good. How would you say I want to prepare myself? Myself is the same as me. So you would
   say I want to prepare me.
Student: Quiero prepararme.
Teacher: Good, quiero prepararme. I want to prepare me. I want to prepare myself and this means I want
   to get ready and you can use this like I want to get ready. Quiero prepararme. Now this probably
   sounds quite formal in English: I want to prepare myself, but we should be aware that in English,
   Latin words sound especially formal. Not always: cancel doesn’t sound formal because it’s the
   only word we use to say cancel. But most of the time we have two words with similar meanings,
   like for example you might have to find and then to encounter, which sounds a little bit more
   formal or a little bit more literary or flowery. And these ones that have these different feelings in
   English are generally Latin words. And the Germanic words like find, which in German is Finden
   (same word), sound more everyday, colloquial. Now we should bear in mind that that’s in English,
and Latin words in Spanish, which is more Latin, of course don’t sound formal, they just sound
normal.
Spanish Track 5
Teacher: You might have noticed we are not using the word for I. Quiero by itself means I want. There is a
   word for I, the word for I is yo. Y-o.
Student: Yo.
Teacher: You only use it if you want to be emphatic. So if you want to say “I want”, to show that emphasis,
   how would you do it?
Student: Yo quiero.
Teacher: Yo quiero. I don’t want:
Student: No yo quiero.
Teacher: The same order as English. I don’t want:
Student: Yo no quiero.
Teacher: Good, yo no quiero. I don’t want. Good, I don’t want to cancel:
Student: Yo no quiero cancelar.
Teacher: Good. Yo no quiero cancelar. How would you say celebration?
Student: Celebración.
Teacher: Celebración, very good. And to celebrate?
Student: Celebrar.
Teacher: Celebrar. I want to celebrate:
Student: Quiero celebrar.
Teacher: Quiero celebrar, good. What would it mean if I say: Quiero ilustrar. Quiero ilustrar.
Student: I want to illustrate.
Teacher: Yes! I want to illustrate. This is an interesting word as well, actually. The lus inside of ilustrar
   means light, and the word luz, l-u-z, (so actually this z would be pronounced /th/ in most of Spain
   - /looth/ - but in the rest of Spanish-speaking world /loos/) means light so you can use that word
   as well. How would you say I want to find out? Now in Spanish you will say something like I want
   to inform myself. I want to inform myself:
Student: Quiero informarme.
Teacher: Good, very good. Quiero informarme. So how was information?
Student: Información.
Teacher: Información, very good. What was you, in the sense of I love you, I want you?
Student: Te.
Teacher: And this is informal you, this is used informally. How would you say then I don’t want to oblige
   you? You might think “I don’t know this!” It’s very important, sentences that we think we don’t
   know, to take them block by block. And in this way we will realise we can say so much in Spanish
   that we would have assumed that we don’t know how to say. So the first bit is I don’t want.
Student: No quiero.
Teacher: No quiero. To oblige? So we look to see if we have obligation in English: we have it, it’s a word.
   It’s legal, so how is that?
Student: Obligación.
Teacher: Obligación. And to oblige then?
Student: Obligar.
Teacher: Obligar. So we don’t want to jump from oblige to sticking -ar on it. We want to take that long
   route. Obligation, obligación, obligar. And then we find the word in Spanish. So, I don’t want,
   no quiero, to oblige you:
Student: No quiero obligarte.
Teacher: Good, no quiero obligarte. I don’t want to oblige you. I don’t want to make you do it. So in
   English we would say make you, maybe. Maybe oblige sounds a little bit too formal, but in Spanish
   it's everyday language. How would you say I don’t want to provoke you? I don’t want to provoke
   you:
Student: No quiero provocarte.
Teacher: Good, no quiero provocarte. The word for it in Spanish is lo.
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. So how would you say I want to cancel it?
Student: Quiero cancelarlo.
Teacher: Good, quiero cancelarlo. How would you say I want to regulate it?
Student: Quiero regularlo.
Teacher: Good. I want to talk about this r. An initial r, like in regular in most Spanish dialects, it's a rolling
   r. You get this flick of the tongue, regular. Real, we saw this as well in real, real. Now, if you
   can’t make that sound, I don’t want you to worry about it yet, it’s something that I couldn’t
   pronounce it actually, I couldn’t pronounce it for a long time, and it was really frustrating, and I
   was trying to pronounce it, and when you are trying to pronounce it your mouth gets tense and
   actually you need a very relaxed mouth to pronounce this r because you are kind of lifting your
   tongue up a little bit and letting the air flap it. Now that’s a muscle. If it’s tense the air can’t flap
   it. So I tried a very long time, I got very frustrated and I gave up and then I was practising Spanish
   in Peru, one day I started speaking about rice, which is arroz and the r came out all by itself and I
   was so excited that I was jumping up and down saying arroz arroz arroz and then I heard “the
   gringo is hungry”. My advice if you can’t pronounce this sound is just to let it come. The more
   you hear, just because you want to pronounce it it’s going to come. So initial r or two r's together
   inside the word is going to pronounce this double r. So, the word for but in Spanish is pero.
Student: Pero.
Teacher: P-e-r-o. And the word for dog is perro. P-e-r-r-o.
Student: Perro.
Teacher: So that’s the difference. You have normal r: pero.
Student: Pero.
Teacher: And it’s a bit different to English because it’s still kind of more pronounced. You know you are
   still using your tongue more there. Pero. And then perro, you keep that in the same position that
   you are using to make that Spanish r which is kind of a little bit more pronounced than the /r-r-r/
   English sound, but you pass a little bit of air over it and you let that flick it. Perro.
Student: Perro.
Teacher: Now, like I said, I don’t want you to worry about if you can’t pronounce this, there are even native
   Spanish speakers that can’t pronounce this, so it’s really something I don’t want to inhibit anybody.
   How do you think is salvation in Spanish?
Student: Salvación.
Teacher: Salvación. So how do you think would be to save?
Student: Salvar.
Teacher: Salvar. This word that we used for it, lo, can also mean him. So how would you say I want to save
   him?
Student: Quiero salvarlo.
Teacher: Good, quiero salvarlo. I want to save him. How would you say situation?
Student: Situación.
Teacher: Situación. Good, now if you turn that into a verb you actually get to situate, to place, to put
   somewhere. So how would that be?
Student: Situar.
Teacher: Situar. Good, participation:
Student: Participación.
Teacher: Participación. To participate:
Student: Partipi…
Teacher: So, take it syllable by syllable. This is very important, so it doesn’t become like a salad. You want
   to take it syllable by syllable.
Student: Participation-participación-partipisar.
Teacher: Slower.
Student: Participar.
Teacher: Participar. So we must take it slowly, sometimes you don’t need to take it slowly, but we want to
   get in the habit of taking it slowly, dividing up syllable by syllable. We want to install the correct
   process slowly. We don’t want to jump from participate to participar because maybe we end up
   putting some extra sound “participatar” or something like this and we don’t want to do this. We
   want to take the long route. So for example, if you want to work out how to say to create in Spanish
   you want to go through the long way, you want to go through creation.
Student: Creación.
Teacher: And then?
Student: Crear.
Teacher: Yeah. And that’s it, that’s the verb in Spanish. Crear, to create. How is to experiment?
Student: So it’s experimentation. Experimentación-experimentar.
Teacher: Yeah, that’s it. Experimentar. And this also means to experience. To experiment and to
   experience, which is a little bit of wisdom that I really like there from Spanish because your
   experience is like an experiment. If you think that your relationship with experience is scientific,
   you look what happens and you learn from it, or at least you should. So in Spanish, there is a
   suggestion of that in the fact that these words are the same, to experience and to experiment is the
   same verb, experimentar. The nouns are different. Experience is experiencia, experiment is
   experimento. But the verb, the act, is the same verb, experimentar. Actually this gives us another
   nice rule: experience, experiencia. If we have a word that ends in –ence or –ance, we can change
   –ence to –encia and –ance to –ancia, and we will get the word in Spanish. Difference?
Student: Diferencia.
Teacher: Good. Influence:
Student: Influencia.
Teacher: Yeah, Existence:
Student: Existencia.
Teacher: Good! Consistence:
Student: Consi.. Consi… Consistencia.
Teacher: Good, Inconsistence:
Student: Inconsistencia.
Teacher: Good, Incongruence:
Student: Incongruencia.
Teacher: Yes.
Spanish Track 6
Teacher: What do you think intento might mean? Quiero is I want, and this -o is showing that it’s I. If you
   heard intento, what do you think it might mean?
Student: Try?
Teacher: Yeah. How did you know that? Do you know how you knew that?
Student: Yeah. I sort of went from intend, I intend to do something.
Teacher: There is no rule here to convert intention to a verb. It’s not –ation so we can’t take off the –ation
   and put –r.
Student: Yeah.
Teacher: But we have intention, we know what is the meaning so we can hear a verb like this and understand
   what it means. Intento means I try or I am trying. I try or I am trying. So how would you say I am
   trying to publish it? Again it’s something you think “I can’t say this in Spanish!”
Student: Intento publicarlo.
Teacher: Good. Intento publicarlo. I try to publish it or I am trying to publish it. We’ve got both there.
   Good. How would you say I am trying to administrate it?
Student: Intento administrarlo.
Teacher: Good. Intento administrarlo. I am trying to imitate it or I am trying to imitate him. It could mean
   either.
Student: Intento, OK, it’s imitation-imitación-imitar. Intento imitarlo.
Teacher: Exactly. Now h's in Spanish are completely silent. You must be careful not even to think them
   because they will have a habit of slipping out even if you think it. So it’s written, the h is written
   in convertible words for example, like hospital (ends in –al) but it’s not pronounced. You must
   imagine that it begins with an o. So how would you say hospital?
Student: Hospital.
Teacher: See? You thought of the h and a little kind of aspiration came there, which is fine, but to get the
   perfect accent you really want to think in your mind that it begins with o.
Student: Hospital.
Teacher: There you are perfect. Hospital. Horrible:
Student: Horrible.
Teacher: Good. And here we have an example of double r inside the word. Horrible, horrible. If you can’t
   pronounce that you just make horrible and it will be perfectly understood: there is no problem
   there. Good. How would you say habitual?
Student: Habitual.
Teacher: Habitual. Habitually:
Student: Habitualmente.
Teacher: Habitualmente. The word for now in Spanish is ahora.
Student: Ahora.
Teacher: This is spelled a-h-o-r-a. A-h-o-r-a. Ahora.
Student: Ahora.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Is the h silent in every…
Teacher: Yeah. Unless it’s c-h in which case it’s like English /ch/. Ahora is actually the combination of two
   words: a which means to and hora which means hour. So it’s something like “to the hour”. So that
   gives us another couple of words as well, a meaning to in the sense of direction, to somewhere,
   and hora meaning hour. Ahora, now. So how would you say I want to cancel it, but I don’t want
   to cancel it now? We said that the word for but is pero. So we want to divide it up piece by piece.
   I want:
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: To cancel it:
Student: Cancelarlo.
Teacher: Good. But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: I don’t want:
Student: No quiero.
Teacher: To cancel it:
Student: Cancelarlo.
Teacher: Now:
Student: Ahora.
Teacher: Perfect! So a big sentence which we might imagine that we can’t take on; if we divide it up bit by
   bit we realise that we can think our way through it. The word for I go or I am going in Spanish is
   voy. Student: Voy.
Teacher: Voy.
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Good. Now this is actually spelled v-o-y. Now the v in Spanish can sound like a v in English like a
   /v/ or it can sound like a soft b like /boy/. You might be familiar with the word vamos which means
   let’s go, literally we are going, used a lot like let’s go, vamos. Now this is spelled v-a-m-o-s. What
   you probably hear there is a b. It really depends where you are: in the southern cone around
   Argentina and Chile you hear a lot more /v/ kind of pronunciation in many places. Generally in
   the Spanish-speaking world it’s like a soft b so we want to make that association now between v
   and soft b. To remember this word, voy, we can think of a voyage so we can see the connection
   there between voyage and to go. I go or I am going?
Student: Voy.
Teacher: I am going now:
Student: Voy ahora.
Teacher: Voy ahora. I am not going now:
Student: No voy ahora.
Teacher: Good, No voy ahora. How do you think you might say visit in Spanish?
Student: Visitar?
Teacher: Yeah. Why did you think that? Was it just a guess?
Student: Well, it’s visitation…
Teacher: Visitation, does that exist?
Student: I think so, visitation rights?
Teacher: Exactly! Very good! This is it. It’s a word that exists that we only use in some context, like
   visitation rights. Visitar, visitar, if you are not comfortable with the soft b just pronounce a v, it
   doesn’t matter. When you practice Spanish you are going to pick up the accent of who you are
   speaking to so it’s not a fundamental issue of ours right now. So, visitar. I want to visit him:
Student: Quiero visitarlo.
Teacher: Good. We can look at some other words now with this v sound and experiment a little bit with the
   sound. So how do you think you would say visible in Spanish?
Student: Visible.
Teacher: Good. There is something very good that you are doing here, you are not pronouncing that s as a z
   like in English: visible. Many people at home will find themselves doing this, putting that z there
   from English and pronouncing vi-zi-ble. We don’t want that, we want visible. And the v is like a
   soft b. If you want more elaboration of what is this soft b you can put a small piece of paper in
   front of your mouth and make the b in English like bucket and you will see that paper move with
   that burst of air that comes with bucket. That hard b in English is a plosive sound, it means you
   gather up a little bit of air and you shoot it out when you make that b, where this b doesn’t have
   that, it's a soft one. So you can experiment with that, again like I say we don’t want to stress out
   about sounds, to use a v sound is perfectly fine. Viral:
Student: Viral.
Teacher: Viral. Good. So if viral is viral how do you think virus might be?
Student: Viro.
Teacher: Virus. It’s actually the same word, you are just pronouncing it exactly as it is. Virus.
   Convenient:
Student: Conveniente?
Teacher: Conveniente. Good.
Spanish Track 7
Teacher: How would you say I want to carry on? Now you think “carry on, I don't know this!” So, one of
   the skills we want to really make use of these convertible words is to find the Latin equivalent of
   carry on. I want to carry on, I want to go on, I want to…? What is the Latin word that we could
   use here? Nothing comes to mind?
Student: Like?
Teacher: So, think of-
Student: Ah, continue.
Teacher: So you can think of a -tion word that has something to do with carrying on?
Student: Continuation.
Teacher: Exactly, good. So, I want to continue:
Student: Quiero continuar.
Teacher: Quiero continuar. I want to continue it:
Student: Quiero continuarlo.
Teacher: Good. I am trying to continue:
Student: I’ve already forgotten what trying is.
Teacher: So it's not about remembering, it's about knowing how to find it. So there are a few things you
   could think about, that when we discuss this word, that could lead you back to it, and the important
   thing is to take that time to have those thoughts rather than just, "Oh, do I know it? Do I not?"
Student: Intención.
Teacher: Intención. There wasn't a rule here because it doesn't finish -ation. Our rule was for ones that
   finish -ation, but it was very similar. Do you remember what it is now? I try, so it ends in -o like-
Student: Ah, intento.
Teacher: Intento, good, so that's I try. We want to see first if we can find it... relaxed, not... you know if
   your brain locks on "Do I remember it or don't I?" Game over. But if you go “Okay, what was that
   related to, what was that about?" And just see what pops up, then you are much more likely to get
   it.
   So, Intento. Intento is I try. I try or I am trying to continue:
Student: Intento continuar.
Teacher: Good. Intento continuar. What is demostración? Demostración:
Student: Demonstration.
Teacher: Demonstration. Do you notice something different though? There's some change here.
   Demostración?
Student: There’s no n.
Teacher: Good. There's no n. Demostración. So how would you say to demonstrate?
Student: Demostrar.
Teacher: Demostrar. Now if you get rid of that de-, how would it sound?
Student: Mostrar.
Teacher: Mostrar, and that means to show. To show. Mostrar. So we might think again, mostrar has no
   connection that we can hook on to, but usually when we have a look we can find some connection
   through English, Latin English, that helps us interiorize. Mostrar, to show. The word for
   something is algo. Algo. A-l-g-o. Algo.
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Algo, good. What was the word for you, like in I love you, how was I love you?
Student: Te quiero.
Teacher: Te quiero, so it was te. So how would you say, I want to show you something, in this order, I want
   to show you something:
Student: Quiero mostrarte algo.
Teacher: Quiero mostrarte algo. I want to show you something. What again was I go or I am going and it
   was related to voyage we said.
Student: Voy.
Teacher: The beginning bit of voyage, and you're mostly going to hear it pronounced more like a soft b.
   Voy. Voy.
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Now, just as in English, we say I am going to... and we talk about the future. I am going to continue.
   I am going to eat later. We can do exactly the same thing in Spanish. The only difference is that
   even though, for example, if we use continue – continuar - continuar means to continue. In
   Spanish we say voy a continuar. It's actually because voy is a verb of movement, and when we
   are putting a "to" form, a verb that is "to" something like continuar after a verb of movement, a
   verb that has some kind of motion in its meaning like voy: I am going, Spanish wants to show this
   feeling of motion so you say I am going to and you put the to for that movement, even if you're
   not actually moving and you're just using it to speak about the future.
   So, if you want to say, for example, I am going to confiscate it. I am going to confiscate it:
Student: Voy a confiscarlo.
Teacher: Good. Voy a confiscarlo. Very good. How do you say I am going to examine it? I am going to
   examine it:
Student: Voy a examinarlo.
Teacher: Good. Voy a examinarlo. Good. Now we said lo is it or him. Now the plural of him is them. This
   is not very obvious in English because him and them, they look very different as words. We don't
   ever think of them as the plural of him or of her but it is. It's very obvious in Spanish, lo means
   him or it and if you want to get them, if you want to make it plural, what do you think you might
   do?
Student: Just add the s? Los.
Teacher: Los. Good. So now we have the word for them. To see is ver, ver. We have view in English, like
   view, ver. So how would you say, I want to see them?
Student: Quiero a verlos?
Teacher: Why a here?
Student: Quiero verlos.
Teacher: Quiero verlos. So, ver is to see. If you say I am going to see them, how is it going to be?
Student: Voy a verlos.
Teacher: Good. Voy a verlos. But if you say, I want to see them?
Student: Quiero verlos.
Teacher: And if you say I am trying to see them?
Student: Intento verlos.
Teacher: Good. No a. Intento verlos. Because ver is to see. To try, so trying in its "to" form, to try is
   intentar. Intentar. This is to try. So how would you say I want to try?
Student: Quiero intentar.
Teacher: Good. I am going to try:
Student: Voy a intentar.
Teacher: Good. With a. Voy a intentar. I am going to try to see them? I am going to try to see them:
Student: Voy a intentar a verlos. No, verlos.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: Voy intentar-
Teacher: Slower.
Student: Voy a intentar verlos.
Teacher: Good. Voy a intentar verlos. Good. Let me give you another example of a verb that connects with
   this a, so voy isn't isolated, we can understand the concept better if we see another verb of
   movement. So another verb of movement is pasar. What do you think pasar means?
Student: Is it to pass?
Teacher: Yes, pasar is to pass and to pass by, so I'm going to pass by to visit you. I'm going to pass by to
   visit you. How would we say this? The first bit is I am going.
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Good. I am going to pass by:
Student: A pasar.
Teacher: Good. To visit you:
Student: Visitarlo, visitarte.
Teacher: Well actually lo, other than him and it, can also mean formal you, so if you're speaking formally,
   you can use this lo as well. But I want to go back to pasar. Pasar is a verb of movement. Let's
   take the sentence again from the beginning. The whole sentence is I'm going to pass by to visit
   you.
Student: Voy a. So it's voy a pasar a visitarlo.
Teacher: Good, lo if you are speaking formally or te if you are speaking informally. Voy a pasar a visitarte.
   Voy a pasar a visitarlo. Which would mean him, it or you (formal). How would you say formal,
   by the way, in Spanish?
Student: Formal.
Teacher: And formally:
Student: Formalmente.
Teacher: Very good. Now, if you want to say, I am going to try to pass by to visit you we have to think
   which ones we are going to use this a with and which ones not, which is a great exercise for us to
   internalise this rule. So, I am going to try:
Student: Voy a intentar.
Teacher: To pass by:
Student: A, no. Voy a intentar pasar.
Teacher: To visit you:
Student: A visitarte.
Teacher: Very good. So we learned that rule. Voy a intentar pasar a visitarte. There's not many times that
   we have something between the verbs so there's not going to be a lot of rules like this, don't worry,
   but this one's important because there are many important verbs of motion that we will be putting
   this a after. How was to demonstrate again?
Student: Demonstrar.
Teacher: And what happened to that n?
Student: Demostrar.
Teacher: Demostrar. And what is to show? You get rid of-
Student: Mostrar.
Teacher: Good. Mostrar. And the word for something I mentioned was algo, algo.
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Something. I want to show you something. Let's speak informally. I want to show you something.
   So we're going to use te.
Student: Quiero mostrarte algo.
Teacher: Good. I want to show you something. Quiero mostrarte algo. So maybe you call somebody and
   you say where are you? I'm at home. I want to pass by to show you something. I want to pass by
   to show you something:
Student: Quiero pasar a - what was it?
Teacher: To show you something.
Student: Mostrarte algo.
Teacher: Good. Quiero pasar a, because we had the verb of movement, mostrarte algo. So if we are
  connecting a verb of movement to another verb we connect using this extra a, to. Quiero pasar a
  mostrarte algo. Good.
 Spanish Track 8
Teacher: What was again the word then for it or for him or for you (formal)?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. If we make this feminine, so we change the o to an a, and we're going to see other examples
   of this way of making something feminine in Spanish, we get la. And this means her, it (a feminine
   thing), so objects as well. Well, not objects. Objects don't have gender. When people speak about
   languages that have gender, they tend to think that the object has the gender. But it's not the object,
   it's the word.
   You might have two words for the same object, and one might be masculine and one might be
   feminine. So it's the word. A feminine word for example usually are ones that end in a. So like
   casa, casa, house. If you want to say I want to see it, and with this it you mean the house. What
   do you think you will say? I want to see it:
Student: Quiero verla.
Teacher: Good. Quiero verla. Now what else could that sentence mean, other than I want to see it (the
   feminine thing)? what else could it mean?
Student: Oh. It could also mean I want to see her.
Teacher: Yes, exactly. So we get quite a few meanings just with this little lo and adding an s to it or changing
   the o to an a. We actually get a lot of options. La could mean her, and it also could mean you
   (formal) talking to a female. So you could be saying I want to see you, formally. Now, where you
   use the formal language and the informal language really, really depends on the dialect. So the safe
   way is to go in with the formal and to see what happens and to see how people address you and
   see how people address each other in this context, and you can adjust accordingly. For example,
   in Spain, when you meet somebody, when you're going to a shop, when you meet somebody for
   the first time - with the exception of kind of young peers - the common thing is to begin speaking
   formally. If I compare this to Buenos Aires, for example, in Argentina, it's almost never used, this
   formal way of addressing people. In fact, it's used more often to insult somebody with an extra
   layer of sarcasm or irony, than say, than it's actually used sincerely to be formal. So it really
   depends on the place. You want to go and see.
   But to play safe, you can use the formal, which will be lo or la, speaking to a male or to a female.
   Lo and la instead of te.
   Quiere means he wants, she wants, it wants or you (formal) want. We can see that these four, they
   band together. Not just in words like lo and la, but in the verbs as well. We saw it with es, that es
   means it is, she is, he is, you (formal) are. So they will band together. Quiere means he wants, she
   wants, it wants, you (formal) want. So, how would you say you want to visit me?
Student: Quiere visitarme.
Teacher: Good. Quiere visitarme. You want to visit me. Now if you want to make that a question, in English,
   you put do, do you want? But in Spanish, you won't do anything like that. In Spanish, you will
   just make it sound like a question with your voice. So, how would you say Do you want to visit
   me?:
Student: ¿Quiere visitarme?
Teacher: Good. ¿Quiere visitarme? How would you say You don't want to visit me?
Student: No quiere visitarme.
Teacher: You sounded very sad when you said that. No quiere visitarme. Now if you want to say Don't you
   want to visit me? Again, English gets really complicated there. But not Spanish. So, don't you want
   to visit me?:
Student: ¿No quiere visitarme?
Teacher: Good. ¿No quiere visitarme? You could add the word for why. The word for why is por qué. Por
   qué.
Student: Por qué.
Teacher: It's actually the word for because as well. So why don't you want to visit me?:
Student: ¿Por qué no quiere visitarme?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no quiere visitarme? The verb for to come is venir.
Student: Venir.
Teacher: So of course you could hear /v/, like I just pronounced for you, so you would get the spelling venir.
   But more commonly you would hear /benir/, /benir/, like a soft b. Firstly, let's say, do you want to
   come?:
Student: ¿Quiere venir?
Teacher: Good. ¿Quiere venir? And a nice way to remember venir, actually, is conveniente, convenient,
   "with coming", when things come together. Or if you ever heard welcome in Spanish, you might
   have heard bienvenido or bienvenida, bienvenidos, bienvenidas. Literally the same as welcome.
   Well is bien, and come, there we have venidos, a different version of venir. So venir, to come. If
   you want to say the house, it's la casa.
Student: La casa.
Teacher: What was to?
Student: A.
Teacher: What is to the house?
Student: A la casa.
Teacher: Good. Do you want to come to the house?:
Student: ¿Quiere venir a la casa?
Teacher: Good. How'd you say Do you want to come to visit me? Do you want to come to visit me?:
Student: ¿Quiere venir a visitarme?
Teacher: Good. Don't you want to come to visit me?:
Student: ¿No quiere venir a visitarme?
Teacher: Good. ¿No quiere venir a visitarme? What was the word for why?
Student: Por qué.
Teacher: Good. Why don't you want to come to visit me?:
Student: ¿Por qué no quiere venir a visitarme?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Por qué no quiere venir a visitarme? Good. And of course, here we're using a
   because we have venir. A verb of coming and going, like voy, voy a, venir a, when we're
   connecting to a “to” form. The word for I owe, I owe in Spanish is debo. Debo.
Student: Debo.
Teacher: Debo. The English word debt which is spelled d-e-b-t has this b from debo. It comes from there.
   We don't pronounce it in English, of course. But this word is from Latin and debo is I owe. The
   useful thing about I owe is that you can use it like I must. So if you want to say I must continue,
   you say I owe to continue. I owe to continue. And that's the meaning of I must continue. So how
   would you say that: I must continue?
Student: Debo continuar.
Teacher: Good. How would you say I must identify it?
Student: Debo- identify. Identification.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Identificación.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: Identificar.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: So it's debo identificarlo.
Teacher: Good. Debo identificarlo. I must or I owe to identify them. I must identify them:
Student: Debo identificarlos.
Teacher: Good. Debo identificarlos. Or if they were feminine things, what change do you think you would
   see?
Student: Las.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Debo identificarlas.
Teacher: Good.
Spanish Track 9
Teacher: To know in Spanish is saber. Saber.
Student: Saber.
Teacher: Saber. You may have heard in British slang He's got savvy, she's got savvy. Have you ever heard
   that?
Student: Yeah.
Teacher: And that comes from Latin actually. That slang is coming from Latin. Saber is to know. He's got
   saber. He's got savvy. Saber is spelt with a b, but in English we're saying savvy with a /v/. So
   we're seeing even that connection between the sounds of v and b crossing between English and
   Spanish. Saber, savvy. So saber is to know. So if you want to say I want to know?
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: How would you say I don't want to know?
Student: No quiero saber.
Teacher: Good. How would you say he wants to know or she wants to know or you (formal) want to know?
Student: Quiere saber.
Teacher: Good. You change the -o to -e. And you get quiere. Quiere saber. He doesn't want to know:
Student: No quiere saber.
Teacher: Why doesn't he want to know?:
Student: ¿Por qué no quiere saber?
Teacher: I want to know why he doesn't want to know:
Student: Quiero saber por qué no quiere saber.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero saber por qué no quiere saber. Very good. The word for yes in Spanish is sí.
Student: Sí.
Teacher: This is also the word for if. So how do you say if?
Student: Si.
Teacher: Good. I want to know if you want to know. Of course we're speaking formally. This is the one we've
   learned so far. I want to know if you want to know:
Student: Quiero saber si quiere saber.
Teacher: Good. Quiero saber si quiere saber. I want to know if he wants to invite me. So the first bit is I
   want to know:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: Saber, b sound 'cause it's a b here.
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: If:
Student: Si.
Teacher: He wants to invite me:
Student: Quiere invitarme.
Teacher: So you see if you think about it block by block, it's very simple. If we think slowly, we learn very
   quickly and the process gets much faster. How do you say imagination?
Student: Imaginación.
Teacher: Good. I don't want to imagine. I don't want to imagine it:
Student: No quiero imaginarlo.
Teacher: Good. And what was to come? And we said that we could remember it if we look at convenient,
   conveniente, which is like “with coming”.
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Good. I want to know if she wants to come to the house to visit me. I want to know if she
   wants to come to the house to visit me. So again it might be something that looks overwhelming
   that we can't say. But if we divide it up: I want to know:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: If:
Student: Si.
Teacher: She wants to come:
Student: Quiere venir.
Teacher: Good. To the house:
Student: A la casa.
Teacher: Good. To visit me:
Student: A visitarme.
Teacher: Good! You put a there. Because even though we have a la casa, there in between, you stayed with
   the feeling of venir and you wanted to connect it to the next verb. And you are 100% correct to do
   that. I want to know why she doesn't want to come to the house to visit me. I want to know why she
   doesn't want to come to the house to visit me. I want to know:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: SaBer.
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: Why:
Student: Por qué.
Teacher: She doesn't want:
Student: No quiere.
Teacher: To come to the house:
Student: Venir a la casa.
Teacher: To visit me:
Student: A visitarme.
Teacher: Good. Very good. Well done. Quiero saber por qué no quiere venir a la casa a visitarme. Very
   good. So what we most want to take away from this is the confidence to try to say what we are
   almost sure we cannot say. Because we have this wonderful advantage as English speakers, that
   we have so much vocabulary that we can convert over to Spanish that we won't realize we can
   convert over to Spanish until we try it. I'll just give you now a couple of sentences for listening
   practice. What does it mean if I say Voy a invitarlo, pero no voy a invitarlo ahora?
   What did I say? First bit is Voy a invitarlo:
Student: I'm going to invite them.
Teacher: Lo.
Student: Oh, you. Oh.
Teacher: It could be you. You formal.
Student: You formal or him.
Teacher: Yeah. Voy a invitarlo.
Student: Or it?
Teacher: Or it if it can make some sense. I'm going to invite it. Voy a invitarlo, pero. What is pero?
Student: But.
Teacher: But. No voy a invitarlo ahora:
Student: But I won't invite him now.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero iniciarlo ahora. Quiero iniciarlo ahora:
Student: I want to start now.
Teacher: Good. And something missing though. Quiero iniciarlo ahora:
Student: Ah. I want to start it now.
Teacher: Good. Quiere iniciarlo ahora. Quiere iniciarlo ahora:
Student: You want or he wants.
Teacher: Good. Or she.
Student: Or she wants.
Teacher: ¿Por qué no quiere informarme? Por qué no quiere informarme?:
Student: Why doesn't he want to let me know? To inform me?
Teacher: Yeah. Perfect. But this is perfect what you did. You found the meaning, but you said it how it's
   comfortable for you in English. Exactly. Why doesn't he want to inform me? Why doesn't he want
   to let me know? Perfect. How is justification in Spanish?
Student: Is it a /kh/ sound?
Teacher: Good, yes. If it's /j/.
Student: So it's justificación?
Teacher: Justificación. To justify:
Student: Justificar.
Teacher: Justificar. I'm not trying to justify myself. I'm not trying to justify myself. What is myself in
   Spanish?
Student: Me.
Teacher: Yes. Same as me. Same as me. So, I'm not trying:
Student: No intento justificarlo. No. Justificarme.
Teacher: Good. No intento justificarme. But I want to explain. Now explain is an exception. We have
   explanation in English. But this in Spanish is explicación. It changes, so it's an exception. We
   don't say explanación, but explicación. We have this in English as well. We have in English
   inexplicable. How do you say that in Spanish?
Student: Inexplicable.
Teacher: Yes. We have it in English this root of the c sound with explain. We say explain, but then we say
   inexplicable. So explanation is explicación in Spanish. So how is to explain?
Student: Explicar.
Teacher: Explicar. So but I want to explain:
Student: Pero quiero explicar.
Teacher: Good. Do you remember how to say something?
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Algo. Well done. But I want to explain you something. In English maybe it's more common we
   would say I want to explain something to you. But in Spanish we can just say But I want to explain
   you something. And let's say it informally. So what was the word for you, for informal? We can
   remember it from I love you.
Student: Te.
Teacher: Yes. Te. Te quiero. So but I want to explain you something.
Student: Pero quiero explicarte algo.
Teacher: Very good. Pero quiero explicarte algo. Let's say it all together. I'm not trying to justify myself,
   but I want to explain something to you. So I'm not trying is the first bit. Now I want 100% of your
   mental energy on I'm not trying. All of your attention on I'm not trying then we look at the next bit
   and we forget I'm not trying. Once we've said it, we don't need to hold it. I'm not trying:
Student: No intento.
Teacher: To justify myself:
Student: Justificarme.
Teacher: Good. We can forget that bit. But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: I want:
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: To explain you:
Student: Explicarte.
Teacher: Something:
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Very good. No intento justificarme, pero quiero explicarte algo. Very good. Well done.
Spanish Track 10
Teacher: How would you say to ventilate?
Student: Ventilar.
Teacher: Yeah. Ventilación-ventilar. How would you say to separate?
Student: Separar.
Teacher: Good. Separar. So in English what we pronounce as separate, maybe like an e sound, but if you
   look at how it’s written, it’s an a. Separar. Good. So how was to know, something to do with
   savvy?
Student: Saber.
Teacher: SaBer.
Student: Saber.
Teacher: With a b.
Teacher: Another way to remember this is Homo sapien, there’s that connection there. The Homo sapien is
   the wise creature. Supposedly. And how was to come? Convenient?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Good. So we can remember that convenient is “with coming”, when things come together,
   they are convenient. We’ve seen the “to” forms of the verb end in r and the “I” forms most of the
   time end in o. For example, I want, how was that?
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. I owe? Which we can use like must:
Student: Debo.
Teacher: Debo. I try:
Student: Intento.
Teacher: Intento. Unless the verb is irregular, and we know some irregular verbs already. We saw I am
   going.
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Voy. So that doesn’t end in o, or in /o/. Voy. It’s an irregular verb. So how does this work? Now
   all “to” verbs, all verbs in the “to” form, when we say to go, to want, to segregate, how would you
   say to segregate?
Student: Segregation-segregación-segregar.
Teacher: There you are. All of them in the “to” form end in the letter r. They either end in -ar, -er, or -ir.
   We have an example of each. We have like a thousand examples of the ones that end in -ar because
   this is the one that we’re using to build these from, for example, simulation-simulación-simular.
   Revelation-revelación-revelar. Respiration-respiración-respirar. What do you think respirar
   means?
Student: To breathe.
Teacher: Yes. To breathe. So we could say to respire literally and we go, oh of course, this would be how I
   would say breathe in Spanish. Respirar. Good. So we have many examples of -ar verbs. We have
   one example of an -er verb, in its “to” form, which is to know. How was that? To know:
Student: Saber.
Teacher: Saber. And we have the example of the verb ending -ir, ir, which is to come.
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Good. So all “to” forms are going to end in an r. And it’s either going to be -ar, -er, or -ir.
   a-r, e-r, i-r. In fact, and talking about “to” forms, it’s actually with this “to” that we identify what
   is a verb. Now it’s good to talk about this because at school we learn that verbs are doing words,
   which is really kind of unhelpful, because to be for example is, there’s nothing, you’re not doing
   anything. If you say is, he is here, what is he doing? But is is a verb. Is is a verb because it comes
   from to be. We don’t say He be here. We say He is here. So the way we identify what is a verb, is
   that you can put to in front of it. To be, to stay, to go. These are verbs. And in Spanish, these are
   going to end in r. Either -ar, -er, or -ir. Now the way we get the “I” version, is we take off this
  ending, we chop off this -ar, -er, or -ir and we put -o. We have an example already. We know how
  is to try. What was to try?
Student: Intentar.
Teacher: Intentar. Good. And I try:
Student: Intento.
Teacher: Intento. Good. So we take off -ar and we put on -o. But something else is happening as well.
  Intentar. Intento.
Student: The accent.
Teacher: Good. The accent. Intentar, we have the accent on the end. When we put the -o, the accent is just
  before it. InTENto. Now this is extremely important. If I say intentO, if I put the accent on the
  end, it means something else. It means he tried. Which is going to be useful for us later when we
  learn the past. For now, we need to think that the accent in the present tense is going on the
  penultimate syllable. The second to last syllable. Intentar is not present tense. It has no tense. It’s
  the “to” form. To try. Part of the present tense, other than putting this -o for I, is also moving the
  accent: intento. How would you say to donate?
Student: Donation-donación-donar.
Teacher: Good. Donar. I donate. You take off the -ar and you put -o.
Student: Dono.
Teacher: Yes. Dono. I don’t donate or I’m not donating:
Student: No dono.
Teacher: Good. No dono. How was to create?
Student: Crear.
Teacher: Good. Crear-creación-crear. I create:
Student: Creo.
Teacher: Creo. Good. Comer, comer means to eat. So how do you say I eat or I’m eating?
Student: Como.
Teacher: Como. Good. I’m going to eat:
Student: Voy a comer.
Teacher: Good. Voy a comer. The word for late in Spanish is tarde. Tarde. We know this from English as
  well because we have this slang in English, in British English at least, tardy. Have you ever heard
  that?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Tarde. Tarde. So how would you say I’m going to eat late?
Student: Voy a comer tarde.
Teacher: Good. Voy a comer tarde. You might have heard the word for tomorrow as well in Spanish.
  Mañana. So how would you say I’m going to eat tomorrow?
Student: Voy a comer mañana.
Teacher: Voy a comer mañana. Now in Spanish, if you have some kind of future context, something that’s
  showing you that you’re talking about the future, you can just use the present. You can say Voy a
  comer mañana or you could just say I eat tomorrow because you have tomorrow showing you
  that you’re talking about the future. It’s absolutely perfect Spanish, even though it sounds a bit odd
  in English. It’s perfect Spanish to say I eat tomorrow. There’s no problem there. So how would
  you say that?
Student: Como mañana.
Teacher: Como mañana. So if you want to say I’m eating with Pablo tomorrow. I’m eating with Pablo
  tomorrow. You just say I eat with Pablo tomorrow.
Student: How do you say with?
Teacher: Do you remember how to say to confirm?
Student: Confirmación-confirmar.
Teacher: Good. And what did that mean literally? Confirm?
Student: Ah! “With signature”.
Teacher: So what is with?
Student: Con firma. Con.
Teacher: Con. Good. So, I’m eating with Pablo tomorrow:
Student: Como con Pablo mañana.
Teacher: Good. Como con Pablo mañana. So we can just use the present or we can say I’m going to eat
   with Pablo tomorrow and it’s the same.
Student: Voy a comer con Pablo mañana.
Teacher: Good. Voy a comer con Pablo mañana. Very good. So we are taking off our ending. We’re taking
   off our -ar, -er or -ir and we’re adding -o to get the “I” version. We are also accenting the
   penultimate syllable. The syllable that comes before the last. What is to organize?
Student: Organización-Organizar.
Teacher: Good. Now how do you say I organize or I’m organizing?
Student: Organizo?
Teacher: Organizo. Good. I will just mention for anybody trying to keep up with the Spanish pronunciation
   that that z there is going to be pronounced /th/. /Organitho/ in Spain. Organizo. To have in Spanish
   is tener. Tener.
Student: Tener.
Teacher: Tener. How do you say I want to have it? I want to have it:
Student: Quiero tenerlo.
Teacher: Good. I’m going to have it:
Student: Voy a tenerlo.
Teacher: Good. I’m going to have it late:
Student: Voy a tenerlo tarde.
Teacher: Good! Voy a tenerlo tarde. If you want to say later, you can say more late and the word for more
   is más, m-a-s.
Student: Más.
Teacher: Related to massive. So how is later?
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Más tarde. Good. I’m going to have it later:
Student: Voy a tenerlo mas tarde.
Teacher: Good. I will tell you something that’s going to help you remember tener. Tener is a very
   interesting verb, because other than to have, we can also translate it as -tain. Contain is contener.
   Obtain, this -tain is tener. So how would you say obtain in Spanish, if contain becomes contener?
Student: Obtener.
Teacher: Yes! Obtener. Sustain, this one changes a little bit. Sus-, which is s-u-s, becomes s-o-s in Spanish.
Student: Sostener.
Teacher: Sostener. Sustain. Maintain. Maintain, this main becomes man- in Spanish. So how would you
   say maintain?
Student: Mantener.
Teacher: Mantener. And if you heard entretener, what would you think it means? Entretener:
Student: Entertain.
Teacher: Yes. So it changes a little bit, but you can recognize it. Entretener. And entre in Spanish means
   between. You might hear in Spanish entre tu y yo. Between you and I. Entre tu y yo. Many
   languages express this idea of possession in different ways. In English and in Spanish, we have a
   simple verb: Have, tener, to express possession. But Arabic for example, you would say “at me”
   or “with me” instead of “I have.” So it’s not a straightforward concept that all languages express
   in the same way, this concept of possession. In Turkish, for example, if you want to say “I have a
   car” you say “My car there is.” So it’s not such a straightforward concept that we are expressing
   in all languages in the same way, this concept of possession. Something that Spanish is alluding
   to here is kind of the symbiotic relationship in ownership. When you own something, you also
   belong to it. You must maintain it. You must sustain it. You must contain it. It’s a symbiotic
   relationship. You don’t just own things. You are also owned by them. To have is tener. And you
   also get these other verbs that you can use. Obtener, contener, mantener, sostener, entretener.
   I have is tengo. What happened here? What should it be?
Student: Teno.
Teacher: Yes. That’s what it should be. But it’s irregular. It has a g popping up. But the nice thing about the
   irregular verbs in Spanish is that we can group them together. There’s always a little group of verbs
   that do things in the same way. For example, what was to come?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Very good. Now venir behaves like tener when it makes the I form. So if tener becomes
   tengo, venir might become…
Student: Vengo.
Teacher: Vengo! Good. So I come is vengo. It’s irregular. But we’ve already noticed two verbs that have
   this same pattern of irregularity. And to think of them together helps us. Now if you want to say I
   will come tomorrow, we don’t know the word for will, but we don’t need it. Because tomorrow is
   our future context. What is the word for tomorrow?
Student: Mañana.
Teacher: Good. So I’m coming tomorrow:
Student: Vengo mañana.
Teacher: Vengo mañana. Very good.
 Spanish Track 11
Teacher: So we saw how our “to" form of the verb: to come, to eat, to tolerate. How would to tolerate be?
Student: Toleration-toleración-tolerar.
Teacher: Exactly, tolerar. Good. So our “to” form ends with an r and it's always going to be -ar, -er or -ir.
   And we had an example of each. And we notice that for -ar, -ir and -er verbs, unless the verb is
   irregular, we will take off that ending and put on an -o to get the “I” version, to say I tolerate for
   example. So how would you say I tolerate?
Student: Tolero?
Teacher: Good. And you moved the accent back as well, which is essential for the present tense. Very good.
   If you said toleró, it would mean he tolerated, which as I mentioned, will be useful for us later
   when we learn this tense. But it's important in the present tense to have the accent on the
   penultimate syllable. Tolero. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: And what is I eat?
Student: Comero.
Teacher: So you don't add on the o, you take off the ending – and then you put:
Student: Oh yes, como.
Teacher: Como. Good. This also means how or like, by coincidence. You might have heard cómo estás? -
   How are you? But como is also I eat. So for all verbs, we take off the ending and we add -o and
   we get the “I” version. But for the rest of the versions, for he, she, it, you (formal), for we, etc., the
   verbs split into two groups. Although we have three different endings, we have two groups. Now
   most verbs in Spanish are -ar verbs. This is the biggest group. The group of -ar verbs, the verbs
   that end -ar. In fact any new verb that comes into Spanish will become, will be crowned, as an -ar
   verb. So to give you some examples - tuitear. What do you think that means?
Student: To Twitter.
Teacher: To tweet, yes, tuitear. Facebookear, yes this exists. Googlear.
Student: Excellent.
Teacher: So there is something in the mental lexicon, in the mental dictionary that is saying there can be no
   more -er/-ir verbs. These are a historic group, the door is closed. So we have two groups. So for -ar,
   -er, -ir, if the verb is regular we take off the ending -ar, -er, -ir, and we put -o and we get the “I”
   version. Now for the others, the other versions, there's a slight difference between -ar verbs and -
   er/-ir verbs. Now -ar verbs have the vowel /ah/ as a principle sound, as a sound that keeps popping
   up. So, for example, to eliminate. How is to eliminate?
Student: Elimination-eliminación-eliminar.
Teacher: Good. Eliminar. So if you want to say I eliminate or I delete, how would it be? Think syllable by
   syllable. If you think of it all together it's quite confusing here because you have quite a few vowels.
Student: Elimino?
Teacher: Good. You see when you take your time to divide actually the word piece by piece, it's much more
   digestible. Elimino. Good. Now for he, she, it and you (formal) - we have learned that these group
   together in Spanish - we just use an a on the ending. So how would that be? He deletes or
   eliminates, she/he/you (formal).
Student: Elimina.
Teacher: Good. And we still have the accent on the penultimate syllable, elimina. Very good. How do you
   think you would say to last like “it lasts a long time" or something like this? It's not obvious
   through the word last, but maybe we find something through Latin that helps us work out how to
   say that: “a period of time”, sometimes we call it duration, no?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: So how would that be in Spanish?
Student: Duración.
Teacher: So to last might actually come from this. If it did, how would it sound?
Student: Durar.
Teacher: Yes. And this is the verb, durar. A lot is much in Spanish; it's mucho. So if you want to say it lasts
   a long time you can just say it lasts much.
Student: Durar mucho.
Teacher: This is to last, durar. So how would it lasts be? So…
Student: Dura mucho.
Teacher: So you might be talking about a show or movie. How would you say it doesn't last a long time?
Student: No dura mucho.
Teacher: Good. No dura mucho. How do you say exaggeration? Exa/juh-juh/, exaggeration?
Student: Exageración.
Teacher: Exageración. To exaggerate:
Student: Exagerar.
Teacher: Yeah. So how would you say I exaggerate?
Student: Exagero.
Teacher: He's exaggerating, or she's exaggerating or you-
Student: Exagera.
Teacher: Good. Exagera. He's not exaggerating, she's not exaggerating, you (formal) are not exaggerating:
Student: No exagera.
Teacher: Good. No exagera. Good. Did you ever hear the word mastication in English?
Student: Masticación.
Teacher: Did you ever hear it though?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: I didn't. I mean this is a word-
Student: It’s chewing.
Teacher: Yes. So how do you think to chew would be?
Student: Masticar.
Teacher: Masticar is to chew. Now I didn't know this word actually and this will happen to many English
  speakers as well. You will be able to work out many English words that you didn't know before
  through Spanish. So this was the way round it worked for me. Because I found masticar first, and
  then I saw in English somewhere mastication. So it can work that way round as well which is
  useful. Another example is morder, which means to bite. I learned this in Spanish, and then I saw
  in some novel I was reading, mordent. Oh ok that means biting. You can increase your English
  vocabulary and what you understand in English just through the Latin that you learn in Spanish.
  So if masticar is to chew, how would you say I chew?
Student: Mastico.
Teacher: Mastico. Good. And he chews or she chews, it chews, you (formal) chew?
Student: Mastica.
Teacher: Mastica. Good. Now this is our key sound, this /a/ sound. Now we can add on different sounds to
  this /a/ to get other versions. So for example, if we add on an n to this /a/, we get they and we get
  you (plural). So in English like you guys, you all. So how would you say collaboration?
Student: Colaboración.
Teacher: Colaboración. To collaborate:
Student: Colaborar.
Teacher: Good. I collaborate:
Student: Colaboro.
Teacher: Good. Colaboro. He/she/it/you (formal):
Student: Colabora.
Teacher: Colabora. You can add on to this an n and you get they or you (plural). So how would it be?
Student: Colaboran.
Teacher: Colaboran. Good. Hablar is to speak in Spanish. Hablar. It's spelled h-a-b-l-a-r. What's
   happening with that h?
Student: It's silent.
Teacher: Totally silent. Hablar. How do you say I speak?
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: So hablo is I speak or I am speaking. Habla is-
Student: He/she/it or the formal.
Teacher: Good. You formal. So what would it mean if I said no hablan con Pablo?
Student: They're not speaking with Pablo.
Teacher: Good. They're not speaking with Pablo or they don't speak with Pablo. Good. How would you say
   I want to speak?
Student: Quiero hablar.
Teacher: How would you say I'm going to speak? Think of to go on a voyage.
Student: Ah, voy.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Yes. Voy hablar.
Teacher: Now I'm not sure, because hablar starts with /a/, I'm not sure if you put the a to connect them.
   Did you?
Student: Oh, no I didn't. Voy a hablar.
Teacher: And when you speak quickly, it will kind of blend together. Voy a hablar. Maybe it's a fraction
   longer, voy a hablar, but it will stick together like this. Good. Now, if we go back to this he/she/it
   form, habla, and we add an s, we get the you (informal).
Student: Hablas.
Teacher: So this is speaking to one person informally. Hablas. When we have one of these little words: te,
   me, lo, los, la, las, they will come before the changed verb. So the changed verb is the one that
   isn't ending in r anymore. They will come before this verb. So if we have quiero, I want, and we
   want to say I want it, that it must come before the verb. So how would it be?
Student: Lo quiero.
Teacher: But that little word can also go after the complete verb. If we say something like I want to see it,
   we end up actually having an option where we put that it. But it doesn't matter; there's no change
   in meaning. It's exactly the same, you just have the option.
   So what was to see, which was related to English view?
Student: Ver?
Teacher: So if you want to say I want to see it or I want to see him?
Student: So it's quiero verlo.
Teacher: Quiero verlo.
Student: Or lo quiero ver.
Teacher: Yeah you have the option. Lo quiero ver. But if you have one changed verb all by itself, you don't
   have the option; it must go before. You might say it's important to speak about it. Now you don't
   need to say about in Spanish, we're going to say to speak it and that's understood to speak about
   it. So here, in that clause and that bit, to speak about it is only to speak. So how would you say it's
   important to speak about it or literally, it's important to speak it?
Student: Es importante hablarlo.
Teacher: Good. So how was I must or I owe, which is related to the English word debt?
Student: Debo.
Teacher: So I must invite him:
Student: Debo invitarlo.
Teacher: Or?
Student: Lo debo invitar.
Teacher: Good. So that's the deal with these little words, where we can put them. Good.
Spanish Track 12
Teacher: So, we're looking at -ar verbs and how they work, and we are changing them for the different
   people. Let's make a recap. How would you say to contaminate?
Student: Contaminar.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say it's contaminating?
Student: Contamina.
Teacher: Good. So our key vowel for -ar verbs is /a/. That's our key vowel. We add a n to get you guys or
   they contaminate. So how would that be?
Student: Contaminan.
Teacher: And we add an s to the he/she/it form to get the you (informal). So you (informal) contaminate
   would be:
Student: Contaminas.
Teacher: Now for -er/-ir verbs, for -er/-ir verbs, their key sound is /e/. For this closed group of historic
   verbs, their key sound is /e/. So, what do you think vender means? Vender. What do you think
   that means?
Student: Does it have anything to do with vent and ventilation?
Teacher: No it's not a t, it's a d.
Student: Oh vending. Vending machine?
Teacher: Yeah. Good. So what does it mean then, vender? What does a vending machine do? It's a selling
   machine. Or you might have heard street vender as well. So I sell or I'm selling:
Student: Vendo.
Teacher: I'm selling it:
Student: Lo vendo?
Teacher: Good. Is there anywhere else you can put that lo? Do you have the option here?
Student: Well, we can put it at the end if it's in its vender state.
Teacher: Exactly. So no, we can't put it anywhere else. It has to go there. Lo vendo. How would you say
   I'm selling them?
Student: Lo vendas.
Teacher: It's very important when you’re making-
Student: Véndolo. Las. Oh. Sorry.
Teacher: It's very important when you're building the sentence that you take your time to understand who's
   doing what. Ah? So I sell, it’s me doing the selling. So I'm selling them, the first bit you want to
   work out is I'm selling. What's that?
Student: Vendo.
Teacher: Good. And then you want to work out them. I sell is vendo. I sell them is?
Student: Los vendo.
Teacher: Los vendo. Good. So this process of dividing it into two thoughts, just doing that is going to make
   sure that you don't kind of get this salad. Many times, you will just switch them, and you want to
   say she has them but you will say they have her. You know, so it's very important to take your
   time to think about those bits separately. If you're talking about feminine things like I sell the
   houses, how would it be? So it's still them we're going to say, but we mean feminine things. I sell
   them:
Student: Las vendo.
Teacher: Very good. Las vendo. If you want to say actually I sell or I am selling the houses, the word for
   the, we said was la. La casa also becomes plural.
Student: Las.
Teacher: Yes. And the word casa also becomes plural.
Student: Casas.
Teacher: So I am selling the houses:
Student: Vendo las casas?
Teacher: Yeah. I'm selling the houses, vendo las casas, or I'm selling them and you mean the houses:
Student: Las vendo.
Teacher: Las vendo. Good. The reason why we're looking at this with objects is because many people, when
   they're learning Spanish, they remember to change gender for people, but they kind of put all things
   in with lo and los and we kind of want to get out of that habit before it starts. So we imagine the
   houses, we refer to them as las.
Student: Is there a rule for which objects are female and which are not?
Teacher: Well remember it's not strictly the object that has the gender, but the word, the noun in itself. So
   feminine words end in a. Words that end in a, with a few exceptions, are feminine words. So casa
   is feminine: la casa. And it takes la. Then there are other feminine endings. So -ión is a feminine
   ending. The administration is la administración. All of these words are going to be la.
   The opinion is?
Student: La opinión.
Teacher: La opinión. The association:
Student: La asociación.
Teacher: Good. The celebration:
Student: La celebración.
Teacher: La celebración. Good. If a word ends in -ity in English, it's going to be -idad in Spanish most of
   the time. This -idad is a feminine ending as well. So that shows us that all of these words are
   feminine words. So for example you have diversity. You change that -ity to -idad. -idad.
Student: Diversidad.
Teacher: Good. Diversidad. The diversity:
Student: La diversidad.
Teacher: La diversidad. Good. The nationality:
Student: La nacionalidad.
Teacher: La nacionalidad. The same happens with the -tion, it becomes like an s or a /th/ in most of Spain.
   La na/s/ionalidad, la na/th/ionalidad, you could hear either. The creativity:
Student: La creatividad.
Teacher: Very well pronounced. You thought of the vowels very well. La creatividad. The electricity:
Student: La electricidad.
Teacher: La electricidad. These words are very nice as well for guessing other words. Because if you have
   this rule, electricity becomes electricidad, you can assume that electric is probably the same in
   Spanish as well, just sounding more Spanish or having a small change. Even though there's no rule
   for that, you can assume it. So how do you think you would say electric?
Student: ElecTRIC.
Teacher: Does it sound Spanish enough yet?
Student: ElecTRIco.
Teacher: Yeah eLECtrico.
Student: Eléctrico.
Teacher: Eléctrico. How would you say generosity?
Student: Generosidad.
Teacher: Very good. Generosidad. How do you think you will say generous? Have a play with it.
Student: Gener…
Teacher: Have a play with it and see what sits nice.
Student: Generoso.
Teacher: Yes. Generoso. Generoso. For males. For females what do you think it would become?
Student: Generosa.
Teacher: Generosa. Exactly. How lo becomes la, generoso becomes generosa. It also can become plural
   as well if we’re talking about more than one person, male or mixed group, how would it sound?
Student: Generosos.
Teacher: Good. And if I was just speaking about females?
Student: Generosas.
Teacher: Very good. Community:
Student: Comunidad.
Teacher: The community:
Student: La comunidad.
Teacher: La comunidad. Feminine word, feminine ending. How do you think you would say common?
   Common comes from community, by the way.
Student: Is it cómono? Comono.
Teacher: Común.
Student: Ah.
Teacher: So there’s no way to know that.
Student: Comuno or Común?
Teacher: Común.
Student: Común.
Teacher: Común, with the accent on the end. So there's no way to know that. You will get-
Student: It's irregular?
Teacher: There's no rule here so there's no irregularity. So maybe you will take comuno and somebody
   would give you that feedback of común. And then you would realize. But if you didn't take that
   guess, you wouldn't get the word. We will learn a lot of vocabulary very quickly this way.
   How would you say opportunity?
Student: Oportunidad.
Teacher: Oportunidad. How do you think you would say opportune? Opportune, you know we use this
   word in English like timely or convenient. Opportune:
Student: Oportuna?
Teacher: Oportuno. Or if you are talking about a feminine thing, oportuna. Clarity:
Student: Claridad.
Teacher: Claridad. And clear comes from clarity. So you can look at claridad and you can probably guess
   how to say clear.
Student: Clear?
Teacher: But look at the Spanish word. Claridad.
Student: Clarido.
Teacher: And the -idad is the ending isn't it?
Student: Oh yes, claro.
Teacher: Yes, claro. So this is another good skill. When you're guessing, you want to get rid of the ending.
   This ending -idad is what's making it a noun. La claridad. Claro. And claro is used a lot
   conversationally. Other than meaning “clear” as an adjective, it can also be used like “of course".
   Claro, claro, claro. You will hear this a lot in conversation to show agreement or understanding
   of what you've said. Claro. Personality:
Student: Personalidad.
Teacher: Personalidad. So we can assume that person is probably the same in Spanish as well. When I say
   “the same", I mean similar.
Student: So again it's guessing. It could be -
Teacher: Exactly. So what do you think it sounds like? You will develop an intuition, especially through
   listening. This is why listening is important as well because this is what will really develop your
   intuition. Because you might have heard it before and not realized it.
Student: I've heard of persona, so I'm guessing it's persono.
Teacher: It's persona.
Student: Oh persona.
Teacher: It's persona. It's a feminine word. So remember it's the word that's feminine or masculine, not the
   thing. So I am a persona, even though I am a man. The word is feminine, not me. Sincerity:
Student: Sinceridad.
Teacher: Sinceridad. Sincere:
Student: Sencero.
Teacher: Sincero.
Student: Sincero.
Teacher: Sincero. So that's another example of a feminine ending. If it ends -idad, it's a feminine ending.
   All of these words without exception are la. If it ends -ión, that's a feminine ending. All of these
   words without exceptions go with la. Back to vender. How was I sell?
Student: Vendo.
Teacher: I want to sell:
Student: Quiero vender.
Teacher: Quiero vender. Good. I want to sell it:
Student: Quiero venderlo.
Teacher: Quiero venderlo. Where else could we put that lo?
Student: Lo quiero vender.
Teacher: Good. The -er/-ir verbs use as their principal sound /e/. So whilst -ar verbs use the principle sound
   /a/, and we got organizar and then organiza, for - what does that mean, organiza?
Student: He/she or it or you (formal).
Teacher: Good. So organiza, /a/ is a principal sound. Organizan means? When we add an n what does it
   mean?
Student: They.
Teacher: They organize. Or?
Student: You (plural).
Teacher: You (plural). So we add the n and we get they and you guys. Organizan. We add the s and we get
   you (informal), organizas. So /a/ is our key sound for -ar verbs, and for -er/-ir verbs, our key
   sound is /e/. So to get he/she/it and you formal, we'll take off our ending and put on /e/. He sells,
   she sells, it sells, you (formal) sell:
Student: Vende.
Teacher: Vende. How would you say he sells it or she sells it?
Student: Lo vende.
Teacher: Good. Lo vende. Lo vende. We said that the word for something was algo, algo. So you can say
   he's selling something, she's selling something, you're selling something.
Student: Vende algo.
Teacher: Good. Vende algo. Good. What do you think we would add on to vende to get the they form or
   the you (plural) form?
Student: Venden.
Teacher: So we're doing actually the same. So we have a key vowel sound, which is /e/. But then the rest,
   we're doing the same what we did with the -ar verbs. Venden. They sell. They're not selling:
Student: No venden.
Teacher: They're not selling it:
Student: No lo venden.
Teacher: Why aren't they selling it?:
Student: ¿Por qué no lo venden?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no lo venden? Why aren't they selling it to me?, you just say why aren't they
   selling me it? You put the personal one, me, first. The one that refers to the person it goes first.
   You just say why aren't they selling me it? So they are selling. How is they are selling?
Student: Venden.
Teacher: Venden. They are selling it:
Student: Lo venden.
Teacher: Good. They are selling me it. So they come together and the personal one comes first.
Student: Me lo venden.
Teacher: Me lo venden. So whilst we have this complicated stuff happening in English, they sell it to me,
   no, in Spanish we're just going to identify it's it and it's me, me is the personal one so it's going to
   come first, me lo venden. They're selling it to me. They're not selling it to me, or they don't sell it
   to me:
Student: No me lo venden.
Teacher: No me lo venden. Why don't they sell it to me?
Student: ¿Por qué no me lo venden?
Teacher: Very good. The word for us is nos. Nos, the word for us. So how would you say they are selling
   us something? So something, you know algo, is not one of these little words like me, lo, nos. It's
   going to come afterwards. So they are selling us something:
Student: Nos venden algo.
Teacher: Very good. Nos venden algo. But if instead of saying they're selling us something and you just
   wanted to say they're selling us it, they're selling it to us, they're selling us it. How would it be?
Student: Nos lo venden.
Teacher: Good. Nos lo venden. Good. So there you have an us, you have an it, you have a they. It could be
  like hugely complicated, no, if you just took that all as a package and tried to translate it. But
  thinking about the verb first and then you’re thinking about the other bits you need to put, then
  you get the sentence that you want, confident that you have the sentence that you want. How would
  you say they're not selling it to us?
Student: No nos lo venden.
Teacher: Good. No nos lo venden. Why don't they sell it to us?
Student: ¿Por qué no nos lo venden?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no nos lo venden? Very good.
Spanish Track 13
Teacher: To do, or to make in Spanish is hacer. And it has a silent h. It's h-a-c-e-r. So in most of Spain
   actually that would sound ha/th/er. But ha/s/er in most of the Spanish speaking world. What verb
   type is it? What is the ending?
Student: -er.
Teacher: -er verb. So actually whenever we come across a new verb, we want to make a mental note what
   is the ending. Or, rather than make a mental note, just process it. Remember we always want to do
   anything but memorize, so just looking and going “hacer, -er verb, ok”. Just to get in that habit.
   If we know it's an -er verb, we know how to work with it. So how would you say he's doing or
   making, she is doing or making, you are (formal) doing or making?
Student: Hace.
Teacher: Hace. Good. You're doing it:
Student: Lo hace.
Teacher: Lo hace. How would you say they're doing it or you guys are doing it?
Student: Los hacen. Lo hacen.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Lo hacen. You (informal) are doing it. So what is the sound for informal
   you?
Student: Hacen.
Teacher: So for informal you we add on an s to the he/she/it version. So we get:
Student: Haces.
Teacher: You're doing it:
Student: Lo haces.
Teacher: Good. The word for what in Spanish is qué. How do you say what are you doing?
Student: ¿Qué haces?
Teacher: ¿Qué haces? And this is a way of saying how are you as well. ¿Qué haces?, what are you doing?,
   what are you up to? Good. So we see that for -ar verbs, we have the principle sound of /a/, and
   then we add our n or s, n for they or you (plural), and s for informal you. And for -er/-ir verbs we
   have the key sound /e/, and we're adding on s for informal you, n for they, you (plural). Now these
   associations between s and informal you, and n and they or you guys, we're going to see all
   throughout the Spanish verb structure.
Student: So this confuses me a little bit; isn't this also a memorization? Having to remember which ending
   goes with what people?
Teacher: There's a difference between memorization and remembering, ah? We can remember through not
   actively trying to memorize. So not telling you you shouldn't remember anything, you need to
   remember Spanish. I'm telling you that you're going to remember it much easier without the active
   process of trying to memorize anything, which blocks whichever processes we need for
   remembering. I like to describe it in this way: that you borrow information when you memorize it,
   but when you are applying it practically in this construction of these sentences, when you're
   looking from many different angles at the elements that we are looking at in Spanish, then you are
   internalizing it. Then it's really yours, you're not borrowing it. Puedo in Spanish means I can, I am
   able. Puedo.
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: Good. P-u-e-d-o. Puedo.
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: You're probably noticing as well that the d is quite soft when it comes in the middle of a word in
   Spanish, rather than a hard /d/. Puedo.
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: So puedo means I can, or I am able, and the “to" form of the verb is an -er verb. So puedo is an -er
   verb. So how would you say he can or she can or it can or you (formal) can?
Student: Puede.
Teacher: And how would you say informally you can?
Student: Puedes.
Teacher: Good. Now in English, we don't say can you to come?, but it's what we mean. Now this is an
   English problem; the English is taking the to away here; it does it sometimes. You don't say I must
   to come, you say I must come, no? It's like I am able to come. You can think of it this way as we
   thought of I must come as I owe to come. So how would you say can you come? Talking
   informally?
Student: Puede - sorry, informal. ¿Puedes venir?
Teacher: ¿Puedes venir? So this is what we're going to be using to talk with friends, no, this s. We're going
   to be hearing it a lot. If it helps you make the association, you might have heard ¿cómo estás?,
   how are you? The s on the end of estás there is this informal s. Puedes. So, can't you come?:
Student: ¿No puedes venir?
Teacher: ¿No puedes venir? Why can't you come?:
Student: ¿Por qué no puedes venir?
Teacher: ¿Por qué no puedes venir? I want to know why you can't come:
Student: Quiero - oh to know. Ok I'm going know and knowledge and that's not taking me anywhere.
Teacher: Boy's got savvy…
Student: Ah, yes.
Teacher: So I want to know:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: Quiero saber. Why:
Student: Por qué.
Teacher: You can’t come:
Student: No puedes venir.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. If you address each part, part by part, and apply all of our mental energy
   just to the part we need and then forget it. Quiero saber por qué no puedes venir. Very good.
   So to recap, we have -ar verbs and we have -er/-ir verbs. For all of the verbs, we take off the
   ending, -ar, -er, -ir, and we put -o for the “I” version. So vender is to sell and I sell is:
Student: Vendo.
Teacher: Vendo. Comprar is to buy and I buy is:
Student: Compro.
Teacher: Compro. Good. Llegar is to arrive. Llegar. And I arrive is:
Student: Llegaro...oh llego.
Teacher: Llego. Good. So with this rule we can take any verb and we can do this if it's regular. Maybe it's
   irregular and we try it and we make a mistake. So for example, salir is to leave or to go out. If we
   apply this rule, what are we going to come up with?
Student: Salo.
Teacher: But it's wrong; it's salgo. So it's one of those -go instead of -o like vengo, I'm coming:
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo, I have; salgo, I leave, I'm going out. The quite common verbs, we tend to find in all
   languages that the most common verbs are the most irregular. Esperar, esperar, means to wait
   and to hope. Which is interesting and it's accurate enough. I mean you're not doing much more
   than waiting when you hope. We have it in the word desperate actually. Des- is un-, and you're
   hopeless when you're desperate. So esperar is to wait or to hope. How do you say I'm waiting, or
   I'm hoping, or I wait, or I hope?
Student: Espero.
Teacher: Espero. Now how do you say he waits?
Student: Espere.
Teacher: I'm really glad you made that mistake actually. Because it's a wonderful point to elaborate on.
   Before we touch a verb, we want to take one split-second to go esperar: -ar verb. Otherwise what
   happens? Our brain hears /e/-/e/ from esperar, and it wants to put an /e/. What your mind is doing
   there, putting an e because you have espe- and it fits better, is actually even ingrained in other
   languages. For example, in Turkish you have something called vowel harmony. And when you're
   adding on suffixes, there's like two or four, depending on the suffix, two or four different versions
   of that suffix that you can add on so it can agree with the vowel before. So there's something in
   your mind that would prefer an e there. Of course because it's espe- and like I said you even see
   this formalized in other languages, like in this phenomenon of vowel harmony. So to stop that
   process from happening, you must run back to the “to” form and then you take control.
Student: Espera.
Teacher: Espera. And espera means he/she/it/you (formal) wait or are waiting, is waiting. We can build
   the rest. So how do you say they wait?
Student: Esperan.
Teacher: If you want to say they're waiting for me, we don't need the word for for, it's just like they await
   me. We don't need the word for for. So how do you say they await me?
Student: Esperanme - sorry, me esperan.
Teacher: The only option there because it's a changed verb. Me esperan. They're not waiting for me:
Student: No me esperan.
Teacher: Good. No me esperan. I want to know why they're not waiting for me. I want to know:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: Why:
Student: Por qué no me esperan.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero saber por qué no me esperan. Well done.
Student: I was just very happy that I remembered saver finally.
Teacher: Ah good. Saber though with a b.
Student: Saber, ah.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Isn't it from savvy?
Teacher: Yeah there is a grey area between v and b. So it will change between languages. Actually a very
   nice example of this is the word for vocabulary. Vocabulary in Spanish is vocabulario.
   Vocabulario. It's spelled with a v. But the word for mouth in Spanish is boca, spelled with a b.
   Now of course vocabulario is coming from boca. Your vocabulary is your “mouth-ulary". This
   gives us another rule, actually. Words ending -ary will become -ario. So necessary:
Student: Necesario.
Teacher: Contrary:
Student: Contrario.
Teacher: Good.
 Spanish Track 14
Teacher: What was to know?
Student: Saber.
Teacher: Saber. Good. What would I know be, if it follows our rules?
Student: Sabo.
Teacher: But it’s not. It’s sé. So it’s an exception. S-e, sé. You might have heard lo sé, lo sé - literally I know
   it. Because sé by itself is a bit short, so you often hear people saying lo sé, lo sé - I know it, rather
   than sé, sé, sé. So this is irregular, very irregular. S-e. But the rest of the versions of saber are
   regular. So how would you say he knows or she knows or it knows or you (formal) know?
Student: Sabe.
Teacher: Good. So I don't know:
Student: No sé.
Teacher: No sé. We said that quiero was I want, and quiero actually is an -er verb so how would you say I
   don't know what he wants? What is what?
Student: Qué. No sé qué lo quiere.
Teacher: Why lo?
Student: He.
Teacher: Firstly, you're not using the word for he, you're just saying he wants and that's contained in the
   verb. But lo is not he, it's him. Not he. We didn't learn yet the word for he. On purpose actually we
   haven't been learning these words so that we can just use the verb for now.
Student: Ok.
Teacher: So try again: I don't know what he wants.
Student: No sé qué quiere.
Teacher: Good, you must feel comfortable with two words becoming one. I don't know what he wants, no
   sé qué quiere. Good. The word for he is él, él. E-l. If you want to be emphatic: I don't know what
   HE wants, or if you want to show or clarify who you're talking about, you can add that. So how
   would you do that? I don't know what he wants:
Student: No sé qué él quiere.
Teacher: Good. No sé qué él quiere. Or you can say no sé qué quiere él. You can do either; one sounds
   more emphatic than the other, and this is much better understood in live practice. Because the
   emphasis isn't just in the sentence, it's with the hands and facial expression and tone of voice. So
   it's something much better to get live. No sé qué él quiere, no sé qué quiere él.
   The word for she, what is the word for her first? We want to differentiate. What is the word for
   her, like in I want to see her? How would you say I want to see, to view, her?
Student: Quiero verla.
Teacher: Good. Quiero verla. But if you want to say she sees, it's not her, I want to see her, it's she. And
   the word for she is ella. Ella.
Student: Ella.
Teacher: Now this is spelled e-l-l-a. Double l in Spanish is pronounced /yuh/. Ella. So if you want to say
   she sees, to see is a verb, what type of verb is it? -ar verb, -ir verb, -er verb?
Student: Ver. It's an -er.
Teacher: An -er verb. It seems too obvious to us.
Student: Sorry I thought you might be asking something more complicated.
Teacher: No. This is an -er verb. So how do I say she sees?
Student: Ella ve.
Teacher: Ella ve. And if I know who I'm talking about I can just say ve. Maybe when we are contrasting in
   the sentence we have a special desire to use these words. When I say contrasting, I mean in the
   sense maybe I say I want to invite him, but she doesn't want to invite him. So even if we know who
   I'm talking about, there I will probably use the word for she because I'm making that contrast.
   Again these are things you just do very naturally without realizing it once you get practicing. Also
   because your native language probably does the same thing as well. Even if you don't have the
   choice whether or not to put she - like in English you always put it - you will stress it with your
   voice. I don't want to invite him, but SHE does. So because you are stressing that with your voice
   in English, that's also going to carry over. Many things are going to carry over that are positive
   language transfer that we might not necessarily address specifically. So how would you say that?
   I don't want to invite him, but she does want to invite him. So, I don't want:
Student: No quiero.
Teacher: To invite him:
Student: Invitarlo.
Teacher: Good. No quiero invitarlo. But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: Pero. She does. So actually we can just say but she yes. What was the word for yes?
Student: Sí.
Teacher: Sí. So we can just say but she yes. How would you do that?
Student: Pero ella sí.
Teacher: Good. No quiero invitarlo, pero ella sí. Or maybe I even use the word for I there to be emphatic.
   Yo no quiero invitarlo. Yo: y-o. Yo no quiero invitarlo, pero ella sí.
   So we said that salir was to leave or to go out. Now, I leave or I go out is salgo. It's irregular, has
   the /g/ sound popping up. Salgo. But the rest of the versions are regular, so let's make them. How
   do you say he goes out or he leaves?
Student: Sele?
Teacher: Again you're making some Turkish vowel harmony here.
Student: Sorry, what's the to?
Teacher: Salir.
Student: So it's seli- No
Teacher: Salir.
Student: Sale.
Teacher: Sale. Good. So that sele you put before is because it just sounds better. The mind has some kind
   of desire for this vowel harmony. It's very interesting. Sale. Now you can make me the rest.
   They, or you (plural), you guys:
Student: Salen.
Teacher: And you (informal):
Student: Sales.
Teacher: Sales. Good. Now if you want to say I'm going out to eat, how is I'm going out again? So it should
   be salo but it was:
Student: Sango?
Teacher: Salgo.
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. So the irregularity is the same as the other ones that we saw: tener, tengo: to have, I have;
   venir, vengo: to come, I come; salir, salgo. So how do you say I'm going out to eat?
Student: I'm not sure of the word out.
Teacher: This is the verb. The verb is to leave or to go out.
Student: Oh, salgo. Right.
Teacher: So you don't need the word for out.
Student: Ok. Salgo comer. Salgo a comer.
Teacher: Why did you think of the a? I think you felt it. You felt that sense of movement. Good. So salgo a
   comer, it's a verb of movement. Good. Voy a comer, I'm going to eat. Salgo a comer, I'm going
   out to eat. Very good. What was I have?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. I have it:
Student: Lo tengo.
Teacher: Lo tengo. Good. I have them:
Student: Los tengo.
Teacher: Los tengo. Good. If we add on que to tengo, and there's not really any comfortable translation for
   this, but if we add on que we get I have to, in the sense of must, have to. So for example if you say
   tengo que comer you get I have to eat. So we change the meaning of tengo: like have, which is
   just possession, to have to by adding que. Like I said there is no comfortable translation. Que is
   what or that, it's also used as that. We're going to use it like this later, but again it's still very
   uncomfortable to translate. So we will just say we add que and we get the meaning of have to. So
   how would you say I have to do it? What was to do? Begins with a silent h:
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Hacer. So I have to do it:
Student: Tengo que hacer. Hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. Tengo que hacerlo, lo tengo que hacer, you have the option. So we've seen a few verbs
   with this -go business. Vengo, I'm coming; tengo, I have; salgo, I leave; and we've seen that the -go
   just pops up for the “I” version. It doesn't pop up for the other versions, this g. So, tiene for
   example is he has. Tiene. How would you say they have?
Student: Tienen.
Teacher: Tienen. And how would you say you have, speaking informally?
Student: Tienes.
Teacher: Tienes. Good. So if I give you the version for he comes it's viene. So how would you say you
   come?
Student: Informal?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Vienes.
Teacher: Vienes. The word for when is cuándo. Cuándo.
Student: Cuándo.
Teacher: When are you coming?:
Student: Informal, vienes.
Teacher: It's the English that's confusing you.
Student: ¿Cuándo vienes?
Teacher: Exactly. So don't let that English are you coming confuse you. There's a lot we're doing in English
   there that we don't need to worry about for Spanish. ¿Cuándo vienes? When are you coming to
   eat?:
Student: ¿Cuándo vienes a comer?
Teacher: A comer, very nice. ¿Cuándo vienes a comer? When are you coming to eat? Tiene, what does
   tiene mean?
Student: Have.
Teacher: But I need you to be more specific. I'm giving you more information then just have. Tiene:
Student: He/it/she or formal you.
Teacher: Very good. Ella tiene. Ella tiene:
Student: She has.
Teacher: Good. Quiero saber qué tiene.
Student: I want to know what you have.
Teacher: What you have, or she, or it. Very good. We said that a very interesting detail about tener is that
   you can also translate it as -tain, when this -tain forms part of another verb in English. So contain
   becomes contener. So how was it has or she has? He has?
Student: Tiene.
Teacher: Yes. We saw that it was tiene. We haven't looked at why yet, but we've seen that it's a little bit
   irregular. In Spanish you can generalize this irregularity. How is I have?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. I obtain:
Student: Obtengo.
Teacher: Obtengo. Sounds rather formal in English, but in Spanish you might use it like get. I get it, lo
   obtengo. I obtain it. To put in Spanish is poner. Poner.
Student: Poner.
Teacher: That means to put. And I put you have the same business with this g popping up, so how do you
   think it sounds, I put?
Student: Pongo.
Teacher: Pongo. And poner is interesting like tener, because when we have -pose inside of a verb in English
   we can turn that -pose into poner, and we get the verb in Spanish. So the example would be
   compose becomes componer. So to compose is componer. How would to suppose be?
Student: Suposer.
Teacher: So compose is componer. Suppose is:
Student: Suponer.
Teacher: Suponer. And how do you think you would say I suppose? We want to generalize our irregularities
   in Spanish. So how was I put? How was that? I put:
Student: Pongo.
Teacher: Pongo. So suponer, to suppose, becomes, for I suppose:
Student: Supongo.
Teacher: Yeah. Supongo. And you will hear supongo que sí, I suppose that yes. I said that que can also
   mean that. I suppose so, we say in English. In Spanish you say I suppose that yes. Supongo que
   sí. You will hear that. So we had componer, to compose; suponer, to suppose. How would you
   say to impose?
Student: Imponer.
Teacher: Imponer. To expose:
Student: Exponer.
Teacher: To oppose:
Student: Oponer.
Teacher: Yes. I oppose it. I oppose it:
Student: Lo opongo.
Teacher: Lo opongo. I oppose it. Good. And I have:
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. And we said we can add on que to get the meaning of have to. So if you want to say I have
   to see her, how would you say I have to see her?
Student: Tengo que verla.
Teacher: Good. We can say la tengo que ver or tengo que verla. Both are fine. How would you say I must
   see her, I owe to see her?
Student: Debo verla.
Teacher: Debo verla. Or where else would you put that la?
Student: La debo ver.
Teacher: Good. La debo ver. The difference between tengo que and debo is exactly like English. We use
   must when it's a bit more serious: I must see her. And we say have to like an everyday kind of
   thing. The way you use it in English and Spanish is exactly the same. So debo is a little bit more
   severe, a little bit more serious, and tener que, to have to with que, is more everyday. Tengo que
   comer ahora. What does that mean? Tengo que comer ahora:
Student: I have to eat now.
Teacher: Good. I have to eat now. What does it mean if I say voy a intentar comer más tarde? Voy a
   intentar comer más tarde:
Student: Voy is I'm going.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Intentar? Can you say the whole sentence again?
Teacher: Voy a intentar comer más tarde.
Student: It sounds odd, because it sounds like I'm going with the intention to eat later.
Teacher: Good, but it's not a noun. It's not the intention. It's not la intención, it's intentar. And when you
   hear that -ar on the end, you can suspect that it's a verb. Most of the time it's going to be. So you
   want to something. Voy a intentar:
Student: I'm going to intend-
Teacher: I'm going to try.
Student: Ah.
Teacher: I'm going to try:
Student: To eat later.
Teacher: Exactly. I'm going to try to eat later. Good. So let's make a very short recap on these useful verbs
   that tend to have verbs coming after them in this way, like voy a. So we had voy a: I'm going to. I
   can? It might help to know that the word power is related to this word in Spanish. Of course when
   you can, when you're able to, you have the power to. So it's related and it begins with p. I can:
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: Puedo. Good. Voy a comer: I'm going to eat. Puedo comer - what does that mean?
Student: I can eat.
Teacher: Yes. Tengo que comer:
Student: I have to eat.
Teacher: Debo comer:
Student: I must eat.
Teacher: Quiero comer:
Student: I want to eat.
Teacher: Good. So these verbs: quiero, voy a, tengo que, puedo, debo, they're very useful because we can
   just put the “to” form after.
Spanish Track 15
Teacher: What was the word for what?
Student: Qué.
Teacher: And do you remember how was to pass?
Student: Pasar.
Teacher: Pasar. And this can also mean like to happen. To pass in the sense of to occur. How do you say
   he passes?
Student: Pasa.
Teacher: Good. And she passes:
Student: Pasa.
Teacher: And it passes:
Student: Pasa.
Teacher: Good. And if you want to say what passes, meaning what happens, what's going on, what is
   happening?:
Student: I remembered it now. I went through the whole process and I remember people saying ¿qué pasó?
Teacher: This is the past. We said that when you emphasize that -o on the end it's actually the version for
   he/she/it in the past, so ¿qué pasó? is what happened?, and we will look at this later. But what is
   what's happening? What is happening?:
Student: ¿Qué pasa?
Teacher: Good. So if you want to say I want to know what's going on, I want to know what's happening, I
   want to know what's passing:
Student: Quiero saber qué pasa.
Teacher: Quiero saber qué pasa. I want to know what's happening. Good. There's one more thing we need
   to know about the present, and it's gonna fill in, happily, a grey area for us which you might be
   wondering already: how did we get tiene he/she/it/you (formal) has or have, and then the other
   versions tienen, tienes, from tener? To want is querer. What is I want?
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. So how does querer become quiero? So there's something else we need to know about
   the present to understand this, and then we can manage the present completely. So what's
   happening is that when we have an e in the “to” form of the verb like in tener: to have, like in
   querer: to want; when we have an e inside of the verb it's part of the root, not part of the ending.
   Not that -er, that doesn't count. But the /e/ in ten- and the /e/ in quer- of querer. When we stress
   it, when we emphasize it, it often splits; most of the time, it splits into an ie under the stress of that
   accent, under the stress when we say querer we have the accent on the end, we have the accent on
   the ending. Then when we take off that -er we put -o, we would have quero but when we stress
   down that e it splits and it becomes quiero. The same for tener: we would have tene for he has,
   but when we stress down on that e it splits and it becomes tiene. The same for come. We have
   venir. But when we say he comes, she comes, it comes, you (formal) come, it would be vene, but
   it becomes viene. Now it's not happening with tengo, vengo, because we can say the n and the g
   kind of hold it up. So this is probably why it got saved. But otherwise it splits. Now, this might
   seem quite an abstract thing to get your head around, but what is very helpful is that we have these
   between words in English and Spanish. We can identify these between words in English and
   Spanish. For example, we have a word that we use for time in English, but only in music. Do you
   know what is this word? A word we use for time but only in music. When you speak about the
   time, the rhythm of music, you talk about its:
Student: Beat.
Teacher: Not beat but tempo. Now, time in Spanish is tiempo. You see the difference between tempo and
   tiempo, other than the Spanish pronunciation, is that the e has split into ie. So you can even see it
   between words in English and Spanish. Concert in Spanish is - try and do the same thing.
Student: Concierto.
Teacher: Concierto. Good. You stuck in an o to make it sound more Spanish and you split that e. Concierto.
   November is Noviembre. So this will help us remember. So this happens most of the time. We
   already saw places that it doesn't happen; we saw very briefly the verb llegar, which was to arrive
   and we said llego, I arrive. We saw esperar, which was to wait or to hope, espero. It's not
   happening. But most of the time it's going to happen. We saw it happening with tener which
   became tiene, he/she/it/you (formal), tienen, they or you (plural), tienes, you (informal).
   We saw it happening with venir, to come: viene, vienes, vienen. Another verb that we see this
   way is pensar. what do you think pensar means?
Student: Thoughtful.
Teacher: But it is a verb. There is no verb to thoughtful, is there?
Student: Well, to think.
Teacher: Yes that's it, to think. It's very useful for us to group words into families. So “verb” is a family. So
   when you decide what type of word it is, then you narrow down the possible behaviors of that
   word, and you manage to manage it much easier. And making that very clearly - that connection -
   is really really helpful for you. To think, pensar. So if you say I think, how is it going to be?
Student: Pienso.
Teacher: Good. It would be penso but you stress down on that e and it splits into ie and you get pienso.
   How is he thinks or she thinks or it thinks or you (formal)?
Student: Piense.
Teacher: This sounds like vowel harmony. I mean it sounds nice, piense, because we have ie and then we
   want to put an e next to it because it matches. But that's Turkish grammar. You must know where
   you are with any verb. And to know where you are you must go back to the “to" form. Then you
   are confident.
Student: So it's piensar.
Teacher: Pensar.
Student: Pensar, not penser.
Teacher: No, pensar. So you must go back there and then you feel confident. Otherwise the base is going
   to effect what vowel you want to put on.
Student: Piensa.
Teacher: Piensa. You (informal):
Student: Piensas.
Teacher: Good. What do you think?:
Student: ¿Qué piensas?
Teacher: Yeah. ¿Qué piensas? This is a useful verb as well actually. Because if you say I think to eat it
   means I plan on eating. You can say I think to eat, that simple. I think to eat: how would it sound?
Student: Pienso comer.
Teacher: Pienso comer. I think to eat later is I plan on eating later. So how would you say I plan on eating
   later?
Student: Pienso comer tarde.
Teacher: That means I plan on eating late, which is fine, but later is more late. And more is related to
   massive.
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Pienso comer más tarde. I plan on eating later. So you can use it like that as well. We saw
   venir also splits with the exception of vengo. He comes, she comes, you (formal) - how would that
   be?
Student: Viene.
Teacher: Viene. They:
Student: Vienen.
Teacher: Vienen. You (informal):
Student: Vienes.
Teacher: Good. Do you remember how was when?
Student: Cúando.
Teacher: Cúando. When are you coming?:
Student: ¿Cuándo vienes?
Teacher: ¿Cuándo vienes? Entender means to understand. You can use comprender if you forget it, but
  entender is better. It's more common. But comprender is easier because it sounds like
  comprehend, and also in comprender the e doesn't split. I understand is comprendo. But with
  entender it does split. So you can use comprender, but most common in Spanish is entender for
  understand. And here the e does split. So how would you say I understand?
Student: Entiendo.
Teacher: Entiendo. How would you say he understands?
Student: Entiende.
Teacher: Entiende. Good. They:
Student: Entienden.
Teacher: Entienden. Perder means to lose. It's kind of related to perish, there is a connection there, or
  perishable food. You know, food that rots, or real food. Perder, to lose. I lose:
Student: Pierdo.
Teacher: Pierdo. Good. The process is perder-perdo, maybe it splits: pierdo. Good. I lose it:
Student: Lo pierdo.
Teacher: Lo pierdo. Good. I lose them:
Student: Los pierdo.
Teacher: Los pierdo. Good.
 Spanish Track 16
Teacher: Comenzar, what do you think that means? Comenzar:
Student: To commence.
Teacher: To commence. Or?
Student: To start.
Teacher: To start. Again this exists and you can use it and it’s probably easier because it sounds like
   commence so it’s easier to remember. But there’s another verb which is more common, which is
   empezar. Empezar This is a z so that’s going to sound /th/ in Spain, empe/th/ar in most of Spain.
   Empezar.
Student: Empezar.
Teacher: Practice with this one for now. This is to start. How do you say I start?
Student: Empezo.
Teacher: Good that's what it should be, but what might happen?
Student: Empiezo.
Teacher: Empiezo. He starts:
Student: Empieze.
Teacher: What must you do before you make that decision? What must you do? You must go back to the
   “to" form. It's a very important habit.
Student: It’s empezar. Empeza.
Teacher: Good. And then what might be the next step after empeza?
Student: Empieza.
Teacher: Empieza. So this is the process we want to take. It's essential for us to get into that habit of going
   back to the “to" form and then we know where we are. Otherwise it's guesswork. Empieza:
   empezar-empieza. They start:
Student: Empiezan.
Teacher: Empiezan. Good. You (informal):
Student: Empiezas.
Teacher: Good. When are you starting?:
Student: ¿Cuándo empiezas?
Teacher: ¿Cuándo empiezas? Very good. So the e can split to ie; that's something we need to know about
  the present and it's something we need to be on top of. Now it's in the present that this happens
  because, as we know, one of the fundamental elements of the present tense is to have that accent
  on the penultimate syllable. So it's having that accent on the penultimate syllable that makes that
  e vulnerable to splitting. The e might split to ie, or the o might split to ue. We know this already
  actually because we have puedo, and this is a split o. To be able, or “to can”, of course there is no
  “to can" in English, to be able we say is poder. Here actually you can see closer that connection
  with power. Before, I said that the word is related to the word power in English. El poder - el is
  the masculine the - we also saw it's the word for he, it's also the word for the for masculine words.
  El poder is the power. So here it's a noun. It looks like a verb, but if it has the in front of it, we
  know it's a noun. El poder - the power. Poder - to be able. When you take off your ending and
  you change it for present tense, and you stress that o, it splits into ue, and you get puedo. Again
  we can see the same phenomenon happening between words in English and Spanish. So, for
  example, we have the word port in English, but we say Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico means “the rich
  port". Rico means rich or nice or tasty or sweet. So port becomes puerto. We see the o is splitting
  into ue. We have the word force in English, in Spanish this is fuerza. We have the word school,
  in Spanish this is escuela. We have corp in like corporate, which means body. If Corp means body
  in corporate, how do you think it is in Spanish?
Student: Cuerpo.
Teacher: Cuerpo. Good. We have innovative, and this nov in innovative means new. When you do
  something innovative, you do something new. And the word for new in Spanish is nuevo. So you
  saw the o splitting there. You might have heard pueblo before. Pueblo means a village or a people.
  Population in Spanish is one of these exceptions. It's not populación, it's población. And you can
   see the connection between población and pueblo, which means village or people. A people. You
   can see the o in pob- splitting into ue in pueblo. Mortgage, by the way, actually means “death
   pact". You have mort-, which is the Latin root for death, and -gage, which means pact. The word
   for dead in Spanish is - have a guess.
Student: Muerto or muerte.
Teacher: Well actually, here, one you have the noun, la muerte is the death. So the noun is the word you
   put the in front of. In school they tell you that it's the thing, the object. But this is not an object.
   We would think of it, we put the in front of it, it's a noun. La muerte. But then the adjective, which
   is describing, it's muerto or muerta. Or muertos or muertas. So you can see in those words
   between English and Spanish this phenomenon of this o splitting into ue when it takes the stress.
   So this is useful for us for present tense. We need to know this for present tense because if we have
   a verb like dormir, for example, that has an o in the root, when we stress it, it might split. What
   do you think dormir means?
Student: Staying still or dormant?
Teacher: Yeah, what does dormant mean? A dormant volcano. It actually means it's a sleeping volcano. Or
   dormitory, this is a nice connection to make as well. So dormir means to sleep. How do you say
   I sleep?
Student: Duermo.
Teacher: Duermo. Good. In Spanish if you want to say I fall asleep, you can say I sleep myself. So how
   would that sound?
Student: Me duermo.
Teacher: Me duermo. Which means I fall asleep, rather than duermo, I sleep. So you can say I'm falling
   asleep, me duermo. It's so boring, me duermo. He sleeps:
Student: Duerme.
Teacher: Duerme. Good. They sleep:
Student: Duermen.
Teacher: Duermen. What do you think encontrar means? Encontrar:
Student: To encounter.
Teacher: Good. Which probably means:
Student: To meet.
Teacher: Oh it does, it means that as well, but there's a more usual meaning as well.
Student: To find?
Teacher: Yes. So I'm finding it or I find it, how would you say that?
Student: Lo, is it encuentro?
Teacher: Yes it is.
Student: Lo encuentro.
Teacher: Good. Something useful to bear in mind is that different versions of the verb, either the “to" form
   or some other version, might be the noun. So you mustn’t assume always that it's a verb. If you
   see un encuentro - an encounter - this is now a noun. An encounter. Whatever we can put a or the
   in front of is a noun. So, many times some version of the verb will be the noun. Un encuentro is
   an encounter but encuentro, I encounter.
   Demostrar was to demonstrate, and if we get rid of this de-, we get mostrar which means to show.
   Mostrar. So how would you say: I show?
Student: Mostro.
Teacher: It would be mostro-
Student: Muestro?
Teacher: Muestro. Good. He shows:
Student: Muestre, wait. Mostrar. Muestra.
Teacher: Good. Muestra. We don't need to roll the r here because it's just one r. Muestra. Good. And una
  muestra actually is a sample. So there is a noun there that shares that version. Muestra: he shows,
  it shows, she shows, you (formal) show. But una muestra is a sample. They show:
Student: Muestran.
Teacher: Muestran. Good.
 Spanish Track 17
Teacher: So we've seen how two sounds in the verbs in the present tense might split when we put pressure
   on them. We’ve seen how e might become ie, so for example we have querer which means to
   want, but I want is:
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. So we stress down on that e and it splits into ie. And this will happen for the other versions
   that we learned as well. So how do you say he wants or she wants or you (formal) want?
Student: Quiere.
Teacher: Quiere. They want:
Student: Quieren.
Teacher: Quieren. Good. And you (informal):
Student: Quieres.
Teacher: Good. What do you want?:
Student: ¿Qué quieres?
Teacher: Yeah. ¿Qué quieres? Good. So another example where this will happen is with the verb perder,
   which means to lose. It's related to perish. So how would you say: I lose?
Student: Pierdo.
Teacher: Pierdo. And he loses, she loses:
Student: Pierde.
Teacher: Pierde. They:
Student: Pierden.
Teacher: Good. And you (informal):
Student: Pierdes.
Teacher: Pierdes. Good. So we saw that the e can split into ie, and we also saw that an o in the base of the
   verb can split into ue. So we saw, for example, poder is to be able. And then we have puedo, I
   can, I am able. We had dormir, what did dormir mean?
Student: To sleep.
Teacher: Good. And duermo:
Student: I sleep.
Teacher: Good. What changed when we added me? Me duermo:
Student: I think it's I fall asleep.
Teacher: Yes. I sleep myself, I fall asleep. Good. So we can expect to see these o's split, but not always.
   For example, to eat was? To eat:
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. And I eat:
Student: Como.
Teacher: Como. So it didn't split there. So there's no way to know where it will, where it won't. Most of the
   time it will and you just have to kind of experiment and see what happens. And you will always
   get the feedback when you try to see if it splits or not. You'll also develop an intuition of where
   you should do it. So colgar, for example, is to hang. So if you want to say I hang:
Student: Cuelgo.
Teacher: Cuelgo. Good. He hangs:
Student: Cuelge, no it's colgar, so it's cuelga.
Teacher: Cuelga. Why do you think you said cuelge first?
Student: Well the reason you explained before with the- because it has an /e/ sound before, it seems to go
   more.
Teacher: Exactly, it fits more. So you will find yourself doing that. How do you get out of doing that, how
   do you stop that happening?
Student: By going back to the “to” version of the verb.
Teacher: Exactly, and then you're in control. Colgar, -ar verb, cuelga. Good. They hang:
Student: Cuelgan.
Teacher: Good. They hang it:
Student: Lo cuelgan.
Teacher: Lo cuelgan. They hang them:
Student: Los cuelgan.
Teacher: Good. She hangs them:
Student: Los cuelga.
Teacher: Good. Los cuelga. Words in English that begin al-, so not end -al like normal, normal, metal,
   metal, they begin al-, they come from Arabic. This al- means the in Arabic. And in Arabic it's
   written with the word. It's written as one word. It's all stuck together. So when words came in from
   Arabic they kind of came in most of the time with this al-, which meant the. So for example,
   alcohol, and when we say the alcohol, we are actually saying something like “the the alcohol”,
   something like this. The verb to take is tomar. Tomar. T-o-m-a-r.
Student: Tomar.
Teacher: Tomar. And this is also used like to drink. So it's used like take generically, generally, but also to
   drink. How would you say: I don't drink alcohol, I don't take alcohol?
Student: No tomo alcohol.
Teacher: Good. No tomo alcohol. Sugar in Spanish is azucar.
Student: Azucar.
Teacher: Azucar. Or in Spain because we have a z here, it will be /athucar/ in most of Spain. Now, this is
   also an Arabic word, and it's the same word as sugar in English. Might not look like it. What's
   happened here? In Arabic, the l of al - the word for the - assimilates, changes to match the next
   letter if the next letter is kind of close to it. It does this with about half the letters. So in Arabic
   actually, instead of alzucar, you say azucar. And this passed into Spanish. But in English we got
   the word without the the at the beginning this time. This time sugar came in without the the at the
   beginning. So they look kind of different, and sound rather different: sugar, azucar. But again
   they're the same word. So how would you say: I don't take sugar?
Student: No tomo azucar.
Teacher: Good. No tomo azucar. Arroz, rice, is also an Arabic word. It's actually al ruz, the rice. But again
   in Spanish, the l assimilated to the next r, as it does in Arabic and instead of al ruz like in arabic,
   arruz, we ended up with arroz.
Student: So it's two r's?
Teacher: Two r's.
Student: So is azucar with two s's?
Teacher: Nope. It's with a z here because two s's are not a combination you find in Spanish. So for example,
   in the word possible, we have two s's there in English. But in Spanish when we write posible, we
   write one s. The same with passion; we write one s in Spanish, pasión. So you don't get two s's
   together in Spanish. But you do get two r's together to differentiate between the normal r and the
   rolling r. So in Spanish we have a-r-r-o-z. It's just assimilation of al ruz: arruz, to Spanish arroz.
   And it's the same word that's in English, rice. So how do you say: I want rice?
Student: Quiero arroz.
Teacher: Quiero arroz. Good. Algebra. How would that be in Spanish?
Student: Alguebra?
   Teacher: /Al-juh-
   bra/ Student:
   Algebra.
Teacher: Algebra. Good. Spanish has a lot more Arabic than English. The south of Spain was part of the
   Muslim world for 800 years, so the languages had a lot of contact. And you get more words in
   Spanish that you don't have in English that are from Arabic. So for example, aceite, oil. In Arabic
   this is zet. Aceite. Aceituna, olive, zetun in Arabic. Alfombra, which means carpet, almohada,
   which means pillow, all of these words they came in from Arabic. When you find al- at the
   beginning, with maybe a couple of exceptions, it's from Arabic. So we said I take is tomo.
   How is: he takes, she takes, it takes, you (formal) take?
Student: Toma.
Teacher: Toma. Good. You (informal)? Talking to a friend:
Student: Tomas.
Teacher: Good. How would you say what are you taking? This could be a way to ask what do you want to
   drink?
Student: ¿Qué tomas?
Teacher: ¿Qué tomas? To drink exists. It's beber, beber. And the word drink, the noun: una bebida, a
   drink. Una, we have a for feminine words - una bebida or la bebida, the drink, comes from beber.
   But tomar, to take, is extremely common. They take:
Student: Toman.
Teacher: Toman. Good. Now there's one more version of the verbs that we didn't learn yet, which was the
   “we” version. We didn't learn how to say we want or we have. Now we take is tomamos. Explain
   to me what I did then to get we take. If I go from tomar to tomamos what am I doing?
Student: You took out the -r and put a -mos at the end.
Teacher: But to make it fit in with your-
Student: Well you took out the -ar, the -ar sound, and you put in the -amos sound.
Teacher: Good. This is very nice to think about it this way because then you fit it in with what you've been
   doing up until now. Taking off the -ar, a-r, and putting in your ending. So you take off -ar and
   you put on -amos and you get the “we” form. So, how is: to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. And we speak:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. Good. So with -amos we're adding on two syllables, and the accent is going on the
   second last syllable. So it's in a different position, that accent, to the other versions. If we look at
   tomo, toma, toman, tomas, tomamos, the accent is moving. Again, to speak:
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: I speak:
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: She speaks:
Student: Habla.
Teacher: Habla. They speak:
Student: Hablan.
Teacher: You (informal):
Student: Hablas.
Teacher: We:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. Good. So this affects the split of the e or the o in the root of the verb. Because we said
   that it splits because you stress it. But in the “we” form we don't actually stress it. So let's look at
   this. What was to find or to encounter?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. I find:
Student: Encuentro.
Teacher: Encuentro. I find or I’m finding. He finds:
Student: Encuentra.
Teacher: Encuentra. Good. You went back to the “to" form, right?
Student: Yep.
Teacher: They:
Student: Encuentran.
Teacher: Good. And you (informal):
Student: Encuentras.
Teacher: Good. Now we. You're not stressing that o anymore so it's safe. It's not going to split.
Student: Encontramos.
Teacher: Very good. Encontramos. We don't stress it, so it doesn't split. What was demonstration?
Student: Demonstración. Demostración.
Teacher: Demostración. So how would you say: to demonstrate?
Student: Demostrar.
Teacher: Demostrar. If you take away this de-, which actually means of in Spanish. If you get rid of it
   you're left with mostrar and what does mostrar mean?
Student: To show.
Teacher: To show. I show or I'm showing:
Student: Mostro.
Teacher: It should be mostro, but-
Student: Muestro.
Teacher: Good. Muestro. And he, or she/it/you (formal):
Student: Muestra.
Teacher: Good. They or you guys:
Student: Muestran.
Teacher: Muestran. You (informal):
Student: Muestras.
Teacher: We:
Student: Mostramos.
Teacher: Very good. Mostramos. You're not accenting anymore that o, so it doesn't split. Mostramos.
   How do you say to think? And we said it's related to the word pensive.
Student: Pensar.
Teacher: Pensar. Good. I think:
Student: Pienso.
Teacher: Pienso. There the e splits when we stress it. If you want to say I think so, you can just say I think
   that yes. I think that yes. That is the same as what?
Student: Que. Pienso que sí.
Teacher: Pienso que sí. I think so, pienso que sí. Good. He thinks or she thinks, you (formal) think:
Student: Piensa.
Teacher: Good. Piensa. They:
Student: Piensan.
Teacher: You (informal):
Student: Piensas.
Teacher: What do you think?:
Student: ¿Qué piensas?
Teacher: Good. If you say what do you think to do, we said that this means what do you plan on doing. You
   can just say what do you think to do. What was to do? To do or to make which begins with a silent
   h:
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Hacer. Good. So what do you think to do, what do you plan on doing?:
Student: Qué- You informal? Qué piensas hacer.
Teacher: Good. Qué piensas hacer. Now how would you say: we think?
Student: Pensamos.
Teacher: Good. Pensamos. So you’re not splitting there. Pensamos. The verb to close, to close, is cerrar.
   c-e-r-r-a-r. Cerrar.
Student: Cerrar.
Teacher: Good. Or in most of Spain, /therrar/. How would you say: I close?
Student: Cierro.
Teacher: Cierro. Good. She closes, he closes, you (formal) close:
Student: Cierra.
Teacher: Cierra. Good. So how would you say: we close?
Student: Cerramos.
Teacher: Good. So we're seeing that really this issue of the e's and the o's splitting is an issue about stress,
   and it’s only when we stress them down that they split under that pressure. When we don’t, they
   are intact.
  Spanish Track 18
Teacher: So for -ar verbs, we have -amos in the present for we. Now for -er verbs, we have -emos for the
   we, and for -ir verbs we have -imos. This is the only time in the whole language that we find a
   difference between -er and -ir verbs. They're one group, but here - and it's the only time in the
   entire language - we have a difference between the two of them; in the present for we. For -ir verbs
   we have -imos and for -er verbs we have -emos. So preferir. What do you think that means,
   preferir?
Student: Prefer.
Teacher: Good. To prefer. To prefer. We want to think with the “to" whenever the verb ends in an r it's
   going to help us just to think of that as “to”. To prefer. Preferir. So how would you say: I prefer?
Student: Prefero.
Teacher: Good. It should be prefero.
Student: Prefiero.
Teacher: Prefiero. It splits. Prefiero. He prefers:
Student: Prefiere.
Teacher: Prefiere. They or you (plural):
Student: Prefieren.
Teacher: Good. How would you say we prefer (and preferir has an -ir ending)?
Student: Preferimos.
Teacher: Preferimos. So there the -er doesn't split, and also the i of -ir is appearing in the endings for the
   first time in the present tense. Preferimos. Good.
   What was to come? It had something to do with convenient, when things “with-come".
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. And how would you say: we come or we're coming?
Student: Venimos.
Teacher: Venimos. Good. To live in Spanish is vivir. V-i-v-i-r.
Student: Vivir.
Teacher: You might know this from viva la revolución, you might have heard that somewhere. Long live
   the revolution: viva la revolución. Or you might have even heard viva Las Vegas: long live Las
   Vegas. Vivir: to live. How do you say: I live?
Student: Vivo.
Teacher: Vivo. Here in Spanish is aquí or acá. Aquí in Spain, and acá in Latin America. Everybody
   understands both. It's an extremely common word so you don't have to worry aquí or acá. So I
   live here:
Student: Vivo aquí.
Teacher: Vivo aquí, Vivo acá. Good. I don't live here:
Student: No vivo aquí.
Teacher: Good. But he lives here. And let's stress that because we're contrasting. But HE lives here:
Student: Pero él?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Vive aquí.
Teacher: Good. Let's make it all together. I don't live here, but he lives here:
Student: No vivo aquí, pero él vive aquí.
Teacher: Good. And don't be afraid to try the soft b. If it's too difficult then it's not a problem that you
   pronounce the /vuh/. Maybe you want to pronounce the /vuh/ at the beginning and then see what
   happens. But the more you pronounce like how people are speaking around you, the more you
   understand. To know is:
Student: Saver.
Teacher: Saber. This is a b.
Student: It's a b, saber.
Teacher: Saber. This is a b so you're not going to pronounce a v. Saber. So we have vivir, to live. And we
   need to open up the association of the letter v to include that soft b. Maybe you look up the word
   in the dictionary for summer which is verano or /berano/. Now if you just program your mind
   with verano maybe you won't get it when you hear /berano/. So it always makes sense to
   pronounce the words the way people around you are pronouncing. So if you are practicing Spanish
   with Colombians, take their accent. If you are practicing with people from Rio de la Plata, Buenos
   Aries, Montevideo, who have kind of a particular accent, take that accent as well. If you're
   practicing with people from Madrid, take their accent. The more you speak like the people you're
   listening to, the easier you understand. Vivir, to live. How is: we live?
Student: Vivimos.
Teacher: Vivimos. There we have the i popping up: vivimos. But for the other versions, we’re going to have
   the /e/. So he lives:
Student: Veve.
Teacher: Some vowel harmony you're making there, Vivir? The /e/ is correct but you changed the beginning
   to match that /e/.
Student: Vive.
Teacher: Good. Vive. Before you said veve. This is vowel harmony again. So you must consciously take off
   that ending, see what you're left with, vivir - viv, and put on your ending: vive - e. Good.
   They live, or you guys:
Student: Viven.
Teacher: Viven. They live here:
Student: Viven aquí.
Teacher: Viven aquí, viven acá. The word for where is dónde, dónde. So how would you say: ¿where do
   they live?:
Student: ¿Dónde viven?
Teacher: I want to know where they live:
Student: Quiero saber dónde viven.
Teacher: Good. Quiero saber dónde viven. Good. Entender is to understand. Entender. We said we can
   use comprender as well, which might be easy to remember, but entender is much more common.
   How do you say: I understand?
Student: Entiendo.
Teacher: Entiendo. Good. The e splits: entender-entiendo. He understands:
Student: Entiende.
Teacher: Entiende. He doesn't understand:
Student: No entiende.
Teacher: Why doesn't he understand?
Student: ¿Por qué no entiende?
Teacher: ¿Por qué no entiende? Good. I want to know why he doesn't understand:
Student: Quiero saber por qué no entiende.
Teacher: Quiero saber por qué no entiende. How do you think you would say: we understand?
Student: Entendemos.
Teacher: Good. So for -er verbs we have -emos. So this is the only difference in the entire language between
   -er verbs and -ir verbs. For everything else they are exactly the same. But for we in the present
   tense, we get -imos and -emos. Vivir-vivimos, venir-venimos, preferir-preferimos, and then for
   -er verbs -emos. Entender-entendemos. Perder, which we said was to lose. So how do you say:
   we lose?
Student: Perdemos.
Teacher: Perdemos. Good. The word for always in Spanish is siempre. So how would you say: we always
  lose? (You can put the siempre before or afterwards.)
Student: Siempre perdemos.
Teacher: Siempre perdemos. We always lose. Or perdemos siempre.
Spanish Track 19
Teacher: We said that the word for always was siempre.
Student: Siempre.
Teacher: Good. Now if you know Italian or some other Latin language, maybe you have something like
   sempre in that language, and you can see again that the e is splitting between sempre and siempre.
   So if you know one of these other languages, or have studied them, it can be useful just to notice
   that. And just noticing that helps you internalize this new word. So for example, well in Spanish
   is bien like in the beginning of welcome, bienvenido. This in Italian is bene. We see that we get
   rid of the e, the last e, and the e in the middle splits. You have from French bon for good. What
   do you think good might be in Spanish? What do you think you will do to make that more Spanish?
Student: Bueno.
Teacher: Bueno. We also said that vamos meant we are going or let's go, and it's something you're gonna
   hear all the time. Vamos, vamos, let's go.
   Now, another useful skill that we want in language learning is to work backwards, not just to work
   from the “to” form, take off the -ar or the -er or -ir and add bits on. But we want to get in the habit
   of also working backwards, because maybe we see or hear somewhere a word like vamos, and we
   want to be able to work backwards from vamos to get the other versions. Taking off the ending
   which is for we, and putting our other bits on. So could you work out from vamos how it would
   be he goes or is going, she goes or is going, you (formal) go or are going?
Student: The thing is you don't know the ending of the “to" form.
Teacher: If you have -amos, you know which is your vowel, no?
Student: /a/.
Teacher: /a/. So, work backwards.
Student: Ah, yes, okay, so va?
Teacher: Va. What does that mean? Va:
Student: He/she/it or you (formal) are going.
Teacher: Good. Va. How would you make that you (informal)?
Student: Vas.
Teacher: Vas. Good. If you want to say where are you going, you will hear to where are you going? What
   was the word for to?
Student: A.
Teacher: A. So how would you say To where are you going?:
Student: ¿A dónde vas?
Teacher: ¿A dónde vas? What would be they go? Or you (plural) go:
Student: Van.
Teacher: Van. Van. Good. So we can work backwards. Vamos-va-vas-van. What was the I version? It was
   irregular and we remembered it by thinking I'm going on a voyage:
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Now the “to” form to go is ir. I-r all by itself: ir. This is to go. So it's very irregular. And this is
   actually because this verb is two verbs that kind of stuck together to form one verb over time. So
   in French you have like aller, which means going, and in English we get alleyway from this. An
   alleyway is like a road, no? And this is related to ir. So ir comes from one verb, historically. And
   then the versions of ir actually come from a different verb. So they kind of stuck together over
   time and they give us this very irregular situation. That's just for interest, we don't need to know
   any of this. All we need to know is voy from voyage and vamos and we can work backwards from
   vamos and there we have the complete set. Voy, vamos, va, vas, van. But to go is ir. they are
   coming from two different verbs historically, which is why we have ir, which is an -ir verb, but a
   coming up for all of the different versions. So how would you say I want to go?
Student: Quiero ir.
Teacher: Good. I can go. I have the power to go:
Student: Puedo ir.
Teacher: Good. I must go:
Student: Debo ir.
Teacher: Debo ir. I have to go. So not I must go, debo ir; I have to go. What is I have from tener?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. And what do we add to that to get the meaning of have to?
Student: A?
Teacher: Que. Like I said there's no comfortable translation for it, but we add on que to tengo and we get
   the feeling of “have to" rather than the feeling of possession. So I have to go:
Student: Tengo que ir.
Teacher: Tengo que ir. I have to go now:
Student: Tengo que ir ahora.
Teacher: Good. The word for tonight is this night: esta noche. Esta noche. So I have to go tonight, I have
   to go this night:
Student: Tengo que ir esta noche.
Teacher: Now noche is feminine. We know this because esta, the word for this, is ending in an a. So how
   would you say: the night?
Student: La noche.
Teacher: La noche. So we said that words ending a are feminine, or there are feminine endings like -ión or
   -idad. La opinión, la oportunidad. If it ends in an e, there's actually no way of knowing whether
   it's masculine or feminine by the word. You have to look up what's around it, or in the dictionary
   it will tell you. But if you hear it in conversation, you have a look at what's around it, esta noche,
   and then you can go oh okay, so noche is feminine. Another example of a feminine word that ends
   in an e is carne, carne. What do you think carne means? It's not at all obvious. You have carnage
   in English. It was just carnage. Carne is meat. Meat. And it's a feminine word. So the meat:
Student: La carne.
Teacher: La carne. I don't eat meat:
Student: No como carne.
Teacher: No como carne. The word for and in Spanish is y. And it's just spelt with a y by itself. Y.
Student: Y.
Teacher: I don't eat meat and I don't drink, or I don't take, alcohol. So tomar was to take, tomar. And
   comer, to eat. So how would you say I don't eat meat, and I don't take alcohol? I don't drink
   alcohol.
Student: No como carne.
Teacher: And:
Student: Y.
Teacher: I don’t drink alcohol:
Student: No tomo alcohol - alcohol.
Teacher: Alcohol. Good. Because we don't pronounce h in Spanish, do we? No como carne y no tomo
   alcohol. Or If you wanted to say I eat meat, and I take alcohol; I eat meat, and I drink alcohol,
   how would that be?
Student: Como carne y tomo alcohol.
Teacher: Good.
Spanish Track 20
Teacher: We mentioned that with future context we can talk about the future using the present. For example,
   we had tomorrow which was:
Student: Mañana.
Teacher: Mañana. Good. We had later, or more late, which was:
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Más tarde. We had tonight, or this night:
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. Good. Another one is pronto. What do you think pronto means?
Student: Now.
Teacher: Ahora was now, no?
Student: Soon?
Teacher: Soon. Yeah. You hear in English sometimes get here pronto. It's get here soon. So pronto is also
   future context. What was the verb to see, or to view?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: He sees:
Student: Ve.
Teacher: Good. They:
Student: Ven.
Teacher: You (informal):
Student: Ves.
Teacher: We:
Student: Vemos.
Teacher: Very good. The I version is a tiny bit irregular, it's veo. So you have v-e-o. So it's not vo as it
   should be, or /bo/. It was too short; it became veo.
Student: Veo.
Teacher: V-e-o. /beo/ or /veo/. How how would you say: I’m seeing her later?
Student: Veo ella más tarde.
Teacher: That means I see she later.
Student: It's not la?
Teacher: It is.
Student: Oh so it's la veo.
Teacher: La veo. Good.
Student: La veo más tarde.
Teacher: La veo más tarde. I'm seeing her tonight:
Student: La veo esta noche.
Teacher: Good. La veo esta noche. We are seeing her soon. We are seeing her soon:
Student: La venemos pronto.
Teacher: What is: to see?
Student: Sorry it should be vemos?
Teacher: Yes. So no guessing. No guessing at all. It's the only rule.
Student: La vemos pronto.
Teacher: Good. La vemos pronto. What if we say we're seeing, we will see, them soon but with this them
   we mean a female group? We're seeing them soon:
Student: Las vemos pronto.
Teacher: Good. Las vemos pronto. He is seeing them soon. And this them, they are still females. He is
  seeing them soon:
Student: Las ve pronto.
Teacher: Good. And you (informal):
Student: La ves pronto.
Teacher: Them soon. You're seeing them:
Student: Las ves pronto.
Teacher: Good. I'll make it a question: are you seeing them soon? The female them.
Student: ¿Las ves pronto?
Teacher: ¿Las ves pronto? Aren't you seeing them soon?:
Student: ¿No las ves pronto?
Teacher: ¿No las ves pronto? Why aren't you seeing them soon?:
Student: ¿Por qué no las ves pronto?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no las ves pronto? Very good. So we saw that with future context, we don't need
  the future. If we don't have future context, we can still use the present to talk about the future using
  this I go or I'm going, which is present, but we can use it to talk about the future in Spanish as we
  do in English. I'm going to see her, and you're talking about the future. We're going to see her. So
  let's practice that - how would you say: we're going to see her?
Student: Vamos a verla.
Teacher: Are you going to see him soon? Speaking informally. Are you going to see him soon? So you can't
  work with ir, which is to go. You should probably work with vamos and work backwards.
Student: Vas. ¿Vas a verlo pronto?
Teacher: Good. ¿Vas a verlo pronto? The word for us is nos. Nos. So how would you say are you going to
  see us soon? Are you going to see us soon? And we're still speaking informally.
Student: ¿Vas a vernos pronto?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Vas a vernos pronto? Where else could that nos go?
Student: At the beginning.
Teacher: Before the changed verb.
Student: ¿Nos vas a ver pronto?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Nos vas a ver pronto? Aren't you going to see us soon?
Student: ¿No vas a ver pronto- nos pronto?
Teacher: Good. ¿No vas a vernos pronto? Or ¿No nos vas a ver pronto? Either way. Why aren't you
   going to see us soon?
Student: ¿Por qué no vas a vernos pronto?
Teacher: Good. So we've seen that we can use the present to talk about the future using “going to”, or also
   using future context. A word like tomorrow, next week; next week is “the week that comes". And
   the week is la semana. La semana. How would you say the week that comes? So what is the word
   for that, which is the same as what?
Student: Que.
Teacher: Que. La semana que, the week that, the week which, comes. And here we mean the week comes.
   So it's it comes. So what is: it comes?
Student: Vene. Viene.
Teacher: Good. So next week is la semana que viene. The week that comes. La semana que viene. So you
   could say let's speak, and to say let's speak we know from vamos you can just use the “we” form.
   So to speak is:
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. We speak:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Let's speak next week. Let's speak the week that comes.
Student: Hablamos la semana que- And now I've forgotten come.
Teacher: It's okay. Okay. If we forgot it, we need to find it again. That's not any problem. Every time we do
   find it, we strengthen that process. And that's what we need, not to remember the word. The process
   we need to strengthen. I want you to know how to find to come and then to go from there. It comes.
   Take your time to find it comes.
Student: Vene.
Teacher: It would be vene but:
Student: Viene.
Teacher: Let's speak the coming week:
Student: Hablamos que-
Teacher: At the moment you have the whole sentence in your mind and you want to translate it. Now this
   process works when you're memorizing. But we're not memorizing. We're doing something else;
   we're building. So we must reduce it down to the smallest piece we could possibly think about,
   think about that piece, get it out, and then forget it. So the first bit is we speak/let's speak:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: The week:
Student: La semana.
Teacher: Which, or that, comes.
Student: Que vene- viene.
Teacher: Viene. Good. Hablamos la semana que viene. What was to see, or to view?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Ver. What is we see?
Student: Vemos.
Teacher: Vemos. If you want to say we see each other, you say we see us. Nos can mean us, ourselves, each
  other, it can mean all of that. Nos. So how do you say: we see ourselves?
Student: Nos vemos.
Teacher: Nos vemos. This is a way of saying goodbye in Spanish. Nos vemos, we see each other. Now the
  future context here is the fact that you're saying goodbye. But we're using present because we
  know when we say nos vemos we don't mean we're seeing each other right now, we mean we will
  see each other again. We're not even mentioning that future context, but it's working. It's allowing
  us to use the present there. Nos vemos, ciao. Or you might want to say, we will see each other next
  week. How would you say that? So piece by piece. We see each other. I want all of your mental
  energy on that, and not thinking yet about next week, how you will say that. What you're worried
  about right now in this moment is how you're going to say we see ourselves. And even before that,
  just we see:
Student: So it's vemos. And it's nos vemos.
Teacher: Good. The week that comes. So the week:
Student: La semana que viene.
Teacher: Good. Nos vemos la semana que viene. So you see it's not important to remember viene. We don't
  want to remember viene, this is useless. In fact, if we memorize viene, we're just going to be
  glazing over the problem. What we want to internalize is the process of “how do I find this". So,
  we've seen that we can use the present to talk about the future using either ir a: to go to; voy a,
  vamos a, va a; or using some future context.
Spanish Track 21
Teacher: So, we have seen how we can use the present to talk about the future in Spanish using voy a, vamos
   a, or using some future context (pronto- soon, mañana- tomorrow, la semana que viene- the
   week that comes- next week).
   But we can also use the present in Spanish to talk about the past, just as we can in English. In
   English and in Spanish we have three ways to talk about the past, or three main ways to talk about
   the past. We can say, for example: I ate. We can say: I was eating. And we can say: I have eaten.
   Now, when we say I have eaten, we are using I have, which is the present, and then eaten is like a
   version of the verb which is kind of complicated in English. You say I have eaten, I have gone, I
   have wanted. Wanted, eaten, gone, they are all very different. So that is kind of complicated in
   English, how to build that. But in Spanish it is very simple.
   So, we have: I ate, I was eating, and I have eaten. This I have eaten is going to be the first past
   that we learn. And we are actually using the present. Now, this have is not tener. Tener we use
   for possession, and we use with the combination of que to give this meaning of "have to". Now,
   the verb that we use for have in the sense of I have eaten, I have gone, in Spanish it's haber.
   Haber: h-a-b-e-r. And of course we have the silent h there, in haber. Haber is to have in the sense
   of I have eaten. But haber is extremely irregular, there is no “habo”, it is extremely irregular. But
   there is a very easy way we can remember all of the versions of haber, even though it is very
   irregular.
   What are the two vowel sounds that we have inside of the verb haber?
Student: /a/ and /e/.
Teacher: Good, we have /a/ and /e/ inside the word haber, and we are going to use that to help us remember
   the versions. Let's start with he.
Student: He.
Teacher: All by itself, it means I have. It is spelled h-e. And of course, we have the silent h there from haber
   in he (h-e). I have. We actually saw already one other verb that forms its I version in this way.
   What was to know?
Student: Saber.
Teacher: Saber. And I know is?
Student: Sé.
Teacher: Sé. I have from haber is spelled h-e, just like sé from saber is spelled s-e. They are the only two
   verbs that form the I version in this way, in this very irregular way. So you get sé from saber, and
   you get he from haber. Different from saber, all of the versions of haber are irregular.
   Now, I and we are connected. We can see how we is the plural of I. I, and then when I include you
   and I say we, it is like the plural of I. So, I and we are connected. So, just knowing that, if you had
   to guess what is we have, knowing that I have is he, what do you think you would guess?
Student: Hes?
Teacher: This works with nouns and adjectives. So, it is a very good example of why, whilst we are avoiding
   grammatical terminology, we want to know what type of word we are dealing with, because
   different words behave in different ways. Nouns, words you can put the or a in front of: la semana,
   una semana- the week, a week; and adjectives, words that describe, that you can put is in front of:
   is red, is tall: these words use -s for plural. But we have never seen the verb do that, have we?
   What does the verb use for we?
Student: -amos.
Teacher: Or?
Student: -emos.
Teacher: Or?
Student: -imos.
Teacher: And what do they have in common, -amos, -emos, -imos?
Student: The -mos.
Teacher: Good, ok. So if he is I have (h-e), how do you think it might be we have?
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Hemos. Good. So, from haber you get he and hemos, no? And we don't want to memorise this,
  like we said we can think just this thought, just the thought "What vowels do we have in haber?
  /a/ and /e/. Ok: he. He by itself is I, it is connected to we: he and hemos."
  Now we go to the other vowel /a/. H-a all by itself (h-a) ha means she has, it has, he has, you
  (formal) have. Now I am sure you can tell me the rest of them. What are the other versions? What
  is they have?
Student: Han.
Teacher: Good. So, we start with this base of he and ha, and we can remember that just by looking at the
  vowels that are inside haber. And then, we can add on what we need. So, we have he for I have,
  hemos for we have, we have ha (h-a) for he/she/it/you (formal) have or has, you added an -n and
  what did you get?
Student: Han.
Teacher: And what does that mean?
Student: They have.
Teacher: Or?
Student: You guys have.
Teacher: Good. And how would you say you have informally?
Student: Has.
Teacher: Has. Good. And that is your set: he-hemos, ha-has-han. So you have two key vowel sounds /e/
  and /a/. He-hemos for I and for we (for I and the plural of I which is we). And then you have ha
  for he-she-it, han for they, has for you (informal). Now we need to learn how to make eaten, how
  to make gone, how to make wanted, if we want to say I have eaten, I have gone, I have wanted.
  This is very simple in Spanish. -ar verbs will lose their -ar, they will lose their final -ar, and they
  will put -ado on the end. So for example, we have to speak which is hablar. If you want to build
  spoken, you take off that -ar and you put on -ado.
Student: Hablado.
Teacher: Hablado. Now we can speak about the past. Now we can say I have spoken, and we need to think
   about the two bits separately. I have spoken:
Student: Is it he? He hablado.
Teacher: Very good. He hablado. I haven't spoken. Where do you think the no is going to go? I haven't
   spoken:
Student: In the beginning.
Teacher: Good.
Student: No he hablado.
Teacher: Very good. No he hablado. I haven't spoken. We have spoken?
Student: Hemos hablado.
Teacher: Hemos hablado. He has spoken:
Student: Ha hablado.
Teacher: Good. She has spoken?
Student: Ha hablado.
Teacher: Good. They?
Student: Han hablado.
Teacher: You (informal)?
Student: Has hablado.
Teacher: Perfect, well done. Now, this is actually more useful, this past, than what you might think it is,
   because this is used even more in Spanish than it is in English. So maybe you want the past I spoke,
   but you can use, for now, I have spoken. This "have past" is very popular and used much more
   than in English. So, how would you say anticipation?
Student: Anticipación.
Teacher: Good, and to anticipate?
Student: Anticipar.
Teacher: Good. How would you say we have anticipated it? So, there is a few things you have to think
   about. Think about them separately, then put them together. We have anticipated it.
Student: Hemos anticiparlo.
Teacher: So, to get anticipated you take away the -ar, and you put -ado.
Student: Ah! Yes. Hemos anticipado lo.
Teacher: And where does that lo go? Because anticipado is not like-
Student: Ah! It has changed now, so it is in the beginning.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: So, lo hemos anticipado.
Teacher: Good. Lo hemos anticipado. The word for for, like in time, we have anticipated it for a long time
   for example, is por. Por.
Student: Por.
Teacher: You might know por favor, which means please in Spanish. Which means "for a favour". Por
   favor, "for a favour". So this por is also for, in the sense of "for periods of time." So, if you want
   to say we have anticipated it for a long time, we will just say we have anticipated it for much time.
   And maybe there are some bits in there that you think you don't know. But we will see when we
   get to them. So, the first bit is we have anticipated it.
Student: Lo hemos anticipado.
Teacher: Good. For:
Student: Por.
Teacher: A lot or much:
Student: Mucho.
Teacher: Time. We saw briefly before that we have a word in English that we use for time, that we only use
   with music. What was that word?
Student: Tempo.
Teacher: Tempo. And how did it change in Spanish?
Student: Tiempo?
Teacher: Tiempo, yes! The e split. So: we have anticipated it for a long time.
Student: Lo hemos anticipado por mucho tiempo.
Teacher: Good. Lo hemos anticipado por mucho tiempo. Very good. Maybe you want to ask somebody
   Did you celebrate? And you think "oh, I don't know did yet in Spanish". You can just say: Have
   you celebrated? And that is fine. Like I said, it is used even more in Spanish than in English.
   So, some certain situations it might sound a little bit uncomfortable the translation into English.
   But in Spanish, most of the time, it is going to be fine. So, have you celebrated? Let’s speak
   informally.
Student: Has – celebración... celebrar... celebrado.
Teacher: Good, good.
Student: So, ¿has celebrado?
Teacher: Good, ¿has celebrado? Haven't you celebrated?
Student: ¿No has celebrado?
Teacher: Why haven't you celebrated?
Student: ¿Por qué no has celebrado?
Teacher: Good. What was the word for where?
Student: Dónde.
Teacher: Dónde. Where have you celebrated?
Student: ¿Dónde has celebrado?
Teacher: Good. Where have you celebrated it?
Student: ¿Dónde lo has celebrado?
Teacher: Good. So, -ar verbs, we take away the -ar and we put -ado. And we get this version of the verb
   that we need after haber, which in English has many different forms. Like I said: you have gone,
   wanted, eaten... it changes a lot. But in Spanish we get rid of the -ar and we put -ado. We said that
   to take, and also sometimes to drink, is tomar. Tomar.
Student: Tomar.
Teacher: So how would you say I have taken?
Student: He tomado.
Teacher: He tomado. Good. We have taken:
Student: Hemos tomado.
Teacher: Good. Has she taken it? Has she taken it?
Student: ¿Han lo tomado?
Teacher: That is a guess, you are looking at me like it is a guess - I want you to establish your own thought
   process of how you are going to find it. So what is the first bit you need to think about? Has she
   taken it?
Student: Has she.
Teacher: Good. What is that?
Student: Ok, so it is he and hemos for I and we.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: So it is.. oh! It is ha! It is just ha.
Teacher: Yes. So, has she taken it?
Student: ¿Lo ha tomado?
Teacher: Sometimes I am going to build you up step by step, sometimes I am just going to give you the
  sentence and you need to deconstruct what thoughts you need to have first, and to divide it up into
  various thoughts to get the sentence, resisting any temptation to guess or to say something that we
  are not sure of. You can be sure and be wrong, there is no problem there, eh? But we want to think
  about it, dividing the sentence up into each individual thing we need to think about. First, she has,
  ha. She has taken, ha tomado. She has taken it. It is lo, where do I put the lo? Before the changed
  verb. Lo ha tomado.
Spanish Track 22
Teacher: So, we were learning how we can use the present to talk about the past, using haber, which is to
   have, in sentences like I have gone, I have eaten. What do you think terminar means?
   Terminar:
Student: To terminate.
Teacher: And what, what verb would we use more commonly in English?
Student: Finish?
Teacher: Finish. Terminar is to finish. Do you remember how to say I have from haber? We can look at
   the two vowels we have in haber, and this will set us off.
Student: Ah, yes.
Teacher: Ok. So, I have:
Student: Is it he or ha?
Teacher: It's he. Good. So, we have:
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Good. How do you spell he?
Student: H-e.
Teacher: H-e. Good. And that h comes from haber, that silent h that you have there. Good. So, how would
   you say I have finished? Firstly, how do you make finished? How do you get the word finished
   from terminar?
Student: -ado?
Teacher: Good. So, you have all the information, now you can build the sentence. I have finished:
Student: He terminado.
Teacher: Good. He terminado. And I have finished it? I have finished it:
Student: He lo terminado.
Teacher: What is the rule about where this lo, la, me, te, can go?
Student: It's in the beginning of the sentence, actually, isn't it?
Teacher: This would be a simplification of the rule that you might find unhelpful.
Student: Well, if it was in the “to” form it would be at the end.
Teacher: So, after the “to” form or:
Student: Or before everything, everything else?
Teacher: Before the changed verb. So this is the way you want to think about it. If we simplify the thought
   to "at the beginning or at the end", when there is other words there, we might be really confused
   about where we can put it. So, we must think “after the complete verb”, the “to” form, or “before
   the changed verb”. So if you say he lo terminado, you’ve actually got it after a changed verb, you
   put it after he. So, this is a very rare situation in Spanish, where we have two changed verbs
   together: he terminado. We see, usually after a changed verb we get a complete verb: quiero
   terminar, I want to finish; puedo terminar, I can to finish; debo terminar, I must/I owe to finish.
   So, here we have two changed verbs together, he terminado, weird situation, which means there
   is only one place it can go.
Student: Before the he.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: It's lo he terminado.
Teacher: Good. Lo he terminado. And I have finished them:
Student: Los he terminado.
Teacher: Los he terminado. So, with -ar verbs, we take off the -ar and we put -ado. With -er/-ir verbs, we
   take away the -er or the -ir and we put -ido to get this form of the verb that we need after haber.
Student: Whether it is an -e - there is no -edo?
Teacher: No. Like I said, there is only one difference between -er and -ir verbs, in all of the Spanish
  language, only one occasion where they are doing things differently and that was in the present for
  we. So, for example, we have vender, which means to sell, and how do you say we sell?
Student: Vendemos.
Teacher: Good. And we had venir, to come, and how do you say we come?
Student: Venimos.
Teacher: Venimos. So, we had -emos and -imos. This is the only time in the whole Spanish language that
  these two verbs are doing something differently. To get this form of the verb that we need after
  haber everything goes to -ido. So vender becomes?
Student: Vendido.
Teacher: Vendido. And venir becomes?
Student: Venido.
Teacher: Venido. Now we understand where is bienvenido from, well-come. Perder, which was to lose,
  becomes?
Student: Perdido.
Teacher: Perdido. Good. Now we can make some sentences. How do you say I have lost?
Student: He perdido.
Teacher: He perdido. What if you wanted to be emphatic and used the word for I to emphasize?
Student: Yo he perdido.
Teacher: Good. Yo he perdido. And, we said that there was a connection between I and we, that we is the
  plural of I, so this can help us remember that there is a little connection between he for I have and
  we have, which is?
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Hemos. They both use /e/: he, hemos. Good. So how do you say we have lost?
Student: Hemos perdido.
Teacher: Hemos perdido. Nosotros. Nosotros is the word for we, for a male or mixed group. If you are just
   females, what do you think you might say?
Student: Nosotras.
Teacher: Nosotras. Good. You pronounced an s there, which was very good, most English speakers find
   themselves accidentally saying /nozotros/, with a z. Not /nozotros/, but nosotros. It is an s.
   Nosotros. Or nosotras. So how would you say we have lost, emphasizing?
Student: Nosotras- sorry, nosotros.
Teacher: Well, it could be.
Student: Hemos perdido.
Teacher: Good. Nosotros or nosotras (if you are all females) hemos perdido. Good. So, we had he and
   hemos, and then for the rest of the versions we go to the other vowel which was in this word
   haber.
   So, give me the other versions. Firstly he/she/it/you (formal) have/has:
Student: Ha.
Teacher: So, lets start with that one, how would you say he has lost?
Student: Ha perdido.
Teacher: Good, and if you wanted to clarify or emphasize that it was he and not she, for example?
Student: Il?
Teacher: Close, él.
Student: Sorry, él.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Él ha perdido.
Teacher: Él ha perdido. And she?
Student: La?
Teacher: So, you must differentiate between she and her, don't just let that feminine idea come in your mind
   and pick one of these. You must take the time to decide which one is it. Is it she or is it her?
Student: Ella.
Teacher: Good. So she has lost:
Student: Ella ha perdido.
Teacher: Good. You have lost, informally:
Student: Has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Now, if you want to emphasize, if you want to say YOU have lost, the word for you, for
   informal, is tú (t-ú). Tú.
Student: Tú has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Tú has perdido. What was I love you?
Student: Te quiero.
Teacher: Te quiero. So, what is the difference between tú and te? It is the same as the difference between
   she and her, and he and him, only in English we don't have two separate words for you and you in
   those two different positions. He sees, I see him. So, he sees, we use he. Then I see him, we use
   him. This is very intuitive to us in English, we don't think about it. She sees, I see her. There we
   have the same change. But you doesn't change, you see, I see you. So, that might confuse us in
   Spanish because in English it doesn't change, but all we need to understand is that tú goes in the
   group of él, ella, yo: tú (you); and te is in the group of those little words, lo, la, me: te. So, lets
   practise this. What was to see or to view?
Student: Ver?
Teacher: Ver. And I see is a little bit irregular, do you remember how it was?
Student: Veo.
Teacher: So, how would you say I see it, I see him or I see you (formal)?
Student: Lo veo.
Teacher: Lo veo. Good. I see her or I see it (feminine thing) or I see you speaking formally to a female?
Student: La veo.
Teacher: La veo. Or how would you say I see them (females) or I see you (plural, all females) or I see them
   (feminine objects)?
Student: Las veo.
Teacher: Good. And what if they were masculine or mixed objects or people?
Student: Los veo.
Teacher: Good. One set of words - we have me for me, we have te for you (informal), we have lo for he, for
   masculine object, you (formal) or even for neuter, which kind of just means when something
   doesn't have gender, maybe you'd say I want to see it and that it refers to a situation or something
   like this, you will use a lot, and then from this the other ones come, but building from lo, so you
   change the o to a, to make it feminine, and you add your -s for plural. Which means one sound is
   left in this little set which is us, do you remember how is us?
Student: Nos.
Teacher: Nos. Good. So this is one set. Now lets practice the other set. How do you say he sees?
Student: Is it ve?
Teacher: Good. And what if you want to clarify or emphasize?
Student: Él ve.
Teacher: Él ve. Good. She sees:
Student: Ella ve.
Teacher: Ella ve. Good. I see:
Student: Yo veo.
Teacher: Good. Now we said the word for we is nosotros, not us, us is nos. We is nosotros. So we see:
Student: Nosotros vemos.
Teacher: Nosotros vemos. Good. We said that you (informal) was tú. Tú. The you in you see, tú ves.
   Which means that we have also the formal you to learn, which is usted. Usted.
Student: Usted.
Teacher: Usted. Which is the formal you, it is actually a contraction of vuestra merced, which means your
   honour. Something like this contracted to usted. So this is the formal you. So how would you say
   you see talking formally?
Student: Usted ve.
Teacher: Good. You see it (talking formally):
Student: Lo ve usted?
Teacher: Or usted lo ve. It can be either way. The word order in Spanish is much more flexible than in
   English. Lo ve usted. Usted lo ve. Either way. How would you say you see them (still talking
   formally)?
Student: Usted ve los.
Teacher: Ok..
Student: Sorry! Los ve.
Teacher: Good. Usted los ve. Good. So, usted is flexible. Los is not flexible. Usted los ve. Los ve usted.
   Now, the word for they, the word for they is ellos (e-l-l-o-s, and this l-l in most Spanish dialects
   makes a /y/ sound. You might hear /ezhos/ around Río de la Plata in Buenos Aires of Argentina;
   Montevideo, Uruguay. You might hear like a /j/ kind of sound in Colombia /ejos/. But in the great
   majority of the Spanish speaking world double l and y make /y/: /eyos/ or /eyas/. I am sure you can
   work out the difference between the two. What is the difference between ellos and ellas?
Student: Ellos is for males, or mixed group, and ellas is for females.
Teacher: Good. So, how would you say they see emphasizing or clarifying that it's they?
Student: Ellos is it ven?
Teacher: Yes! Ellos ven. They see them:
Student: Ellos los ven.
Teacher: Ellos los ven. Good. Or we could have had any combination of gender: ellas los ven, ellas las ven,
   ellos las ven, etc. How would you say: they see me?
Student: Ellos me ven.
Teacher: Good. Ellos me ven. So we are understanding that we have two separate groups of very
   important words. The set of: yo, él, ella, ellos, ellas, nosotros, tú, and usted. Yo veo. Tú ves.
   Usted/él/ella ve. Ellos or ellas ven. And nosotros vemos. Then we have the other set of words -
   me, lo, la, los, las, nos, te.
Spanish Track 23
Teacher: So, I want us to run through the forms of haber, this to have that we use to go into the past. We
  said that we can remember them by looking at the two vowel sounds that we have inside the word
  haber. So give me I have and we have:
Student: He and hemos.
Teacher: Good. And give me the rest of the versions.
Student: Ha, has, han.
Teacher: Good. We said that nouns ending a are feminine nouns. So, for example, the house - la casa. So,
  words ending a are feminine. But, words ending ma are masculine. There's a small group of words
  that end ma, which are masculine words. For example, the problem in Spanish is el problema.
Student: El problema.
Teacher: Good. How would you say Have you understood the problem? Have you understood the problem?
  What was to understand?
Student: Comprender.
Teacher: Comprender, good. We can use comprender or we can use entender. But comprender is perfect
  here as well. Have you understood the problem? And let's talk formally, to usted.
Student: ¿Ha entendido el problema?
Teacher: Good. ¿Ha entendido el problema? Good. So, a very common error for people learning Spanish
  is to say la problema. Now, if we look at why these words ending ma are actually masculine, it's
  going to help us internalize it. So these words that end ma actually come from Greek. Problema
  in Greek is provlima. System in Greek is systima. In Spanish, it's sistema. So how would you say
  the system?
Student: El sistema.
Teacher: El sistema. So it's el. Now in Greek, these words are neuter words. In Greek, you have masculine,
  feminine, and neuter. And neuter words in Greek look like masculine words. They have a similar
   word for the. They look kind of like masculine words. So when they went into Spanish, or into
   Latin, they got mistaken as masculine words. So if we can identify them, there's a key group of
   words we can avoid committing this error with. If it ends ma, it's probably from Greek and
   probably masculine. So how would you say the system again?
Student: El sistema.
Teacher: El sistema. How would you say Have you understood the system? (talking informally) Have you
   understood the system?:
Student: ¿Has entendido el sistema?
Teacher: Good. ¿Has entendido el sistema? Good. Sentir, in Spanish, sentir is to feel, related to sensation.
   So sentir, to feel. And you can also use it like to perceive, in the sense of smell. So, if you wanted
   to ask, for example, Have you felt the aroma? it would be a way of asking Have you smelt the
   aroma? Have you felt it? So how would you say that? Have you felt the aroma?:
Student: ¿Has sentido el aroma?
Teacher: Good. ¿Has sentido el aroma? Good. So el again. So we have el: el problema, el sistema, el
   programa, el aroma, el panorama. El clima, which is a little bit different in English, which
   means climate, el clima. And some others. Have you understood the program?:
Student: ¿Has entendido el programa?
Teacher: Good. Again, how was to lose? (Perishable)
Student: Perdir.
Teacher: Close.
Student: Perder.
Teacher: Perder. Good. So how would you say I have lost?
Student: He perdido.
Teacher: Good. Now what if you wanted to emphasize I have lost?
Student: Yo he perdido.
Teacher: Good. Now if you want to say I have got lost, I have got lost, you can just say I have lost myself.
   We said that I get ready is I prepare myself. Me preparo. We don't use this in Spanish, I get ready.
   You say I ready myself. Me preparo. So you don't say I get lost or I have got lost. You say I have
   lost myself. So how would you say that?
Student: Me he perdido.
Teacher: Again
Student: Me he perdido.
Teacher: Yes. When you say it fluently, it doesn't actually sound any different. Which is why I asked for it
   again, to make sure that you were putting it. Because the /e/ of me and the /e/ of he will blend
   together. Me he perdido. Ahh. So that means I have lost myself, or I have got lost. Now what if
   you wanted to be emphatic as well and say I have lost myself?
Student: Yo me he perdido.
Teacher: Good. Yo me he perdido. How is you have lost (speaking informally)?
Student: Has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Has perdido. We said that the word for you in the sense of you lose, you see, not I see you,
   but you see, is tú for informal you: tú, t-u.
Student: Tú.
Teacher: So how would you say YOU have lost, being emphatic?
Student: Tú ha perdido.
Teacher: There's a bit of a contradiction there.
Student: Tú has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Tú has perdido. Good. So just as me can mean me, or myself, te can mean you or yourself.
   So how would you say you have got lost, you have lost yourself?
Student: Te has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Te has perdido. Te has perdido. And what if you wanted to be emphatic as well?
Student: Tú te has perdido.
Teacher: Good. Tú te has perdido. Very good. What was we have, from haber?
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Hemos. Good. How would you say we have lost it? We have lost it:
Student: Lo hemos perdido.
Teacher: Lo hemos perdido. Now how would you say we have lost ourselves, or we've got lost?
Student: Nos hemos perdido.
Teacher: Good. Nos hemos perdido. And what if you wanted to say WE have got lost, WE have lost
  ourselves?
Student: Nosotros nos hemos perdido.
Teacher: Good. Nosotros nos hemos perdido. Good.
Spanish Track 24
Teacher: The word to give in Spanish is dar. D-a-r, dar.
Student: Dar.
Teacher: Dar. Good. I give is doy. So it’s like boy ending –oy. Doy.
Student: Doy.
Teacher: Good. I give it:
Student: Lo doy.
Teacher: Good. I give them:
Student: Los doy.
Teacher: Good. And what if they were feminine things that you are giving?
Student: Las doy.
Teacher: Good. How would you say he gives?
Student: Da.
Teacher: Da. He gives, emphasizing he:
Student: Él da.
Teacher: Él da. Good. And she gives:
Student: Ella da.
Teacher: Good. How do you say they give?
Student: Ellos dan.
Teacher: Good! Ellos dan or ellas for feminine. Ellas dan. Good. You (informal) give?
Student: Das.
Teacher: Das. And if you wanted to emphasize this you?
Student: Tú das.
Teacher: Good. The word for something we said was algo. Algo. So how would you say he is giving me
   something? He is giving me something:
Student: Él me da algo.
Teacher: Good! Él me da algo. They give me something:
Student: Me dan algo.
Teacher: Good. Me dan algo. Now if you want to say they give it to me, they give it to me, in Spanish you
   would just say they give me it. The personal word me is going to come first and then it is going to
   come and the position where they go we know this already. So how would you say they give me
   it? They give it to me:
Student: Me lo dan.
Teacher: Very good. Me lo dan. Now emphasize or clarify.
Student: Ellos me lo dan.
Teacher: Ellos me lo dan. Good. Or ellas if they were female they. Ellas me lo dan. Good. We said that
   with some future context we don’t need to use the future. So if you want to say I will give it to you
   tomorrow, you could just say I give it to you tomorrow. Lets talk informally, so informally how
   will you say I give you it tomorrow?
Student: Te lo doy mañana.
Teacher: Te lo doy mañana. Very common, very Spanish sounding sentence. Te lo doy mañana, I give
   you it tomorrow, sounds strange in English but perfect Spanish. Te lo doy mañana. How would
   you say are you giving it to me tomorrow? And let’s speak formally, so complicated sentence in
   English. Are you giving it to me tomorrow? What we have to do in Spanish is just work out who
   is doing what. You work out who is doing what and to who and we build that, it's very simple in
   Spanish. Complicated sentence in English but not in Spanish. Talking formally, are you giving it
   to me tomorrow?:
Student: Well it’s da.
Teacher: That’s the first thing you should work out, good.
Student: ¿Me lo da mañana?
Teacher: Good. Now what if you wanted to emphasize you. Are YOU giving it to me tomorrow?:
Student: And usted can come in the beginning or the end?
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: So ¿usted me lo da mañana?
Teacher: ¿Usted me lo da mañana? ¿Me lo da usted mañana? ¿Me lo da mañana usted? These words
   usted, yo, él, ella are extremely flexible for different emphasis. Again it’s not something we want
   to teach here, because those nuances of emphasis change depending on the dialect, and it’s
   something that you pick up in real life because where people move it around is accompanied with
   a change in the voice and hand expressions and you understand in this case intuitively which is
   emphatic. You guys is usted but plural. Now if the word ends in a consonant in Spanish, you don’t
   just add –s, you add –es. So how would it sound, you guys?
Student: Ustedes.
Teacher: Ustedes. Good. So now let’s say will you guys give it to us tomorrow? So again we just wanna
   work out who is doing and to who or to what are they doing and then we can construct it. So, are
   you guys giving it to us tomorrow?:
Student: So it’s dan.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: It’s nos and it’s still lo.
Teacher: Good.
Student: ¿Nos lo dan mañana?
Teacher: Good. Now this could mean you guys or they give it to us tomorrow. Now what if you wanted to
   clarify that it was you guys?
Student: ¿Ustedes nos lo dan mañana?
Teacher: Good. ¿Ustedes nos lo dan mañana? ¿Nos lo dan mañana ustedes? ¿Nos lo dan ustedes
   mañana? How do you say I want to give? I want to give:
Student: Quiero dar.
Teacher: Good. I want to give you it, talking informally. Informally, I want to give it to you:
Student: Quiero das.
Teacher: Work out the verbs first. I want to give, work that out first.
Student: Oh! Quiero dar.
Teacher: Good, to give you is something else, it’s not you give. I want to give, quiero dar, it to you:
Student: So it’s lo and it’s te.
Teacher: Good. And in what order do they come?
Student: It's te lo quiero dar.
Teacher: Good.
Spanish Track 25
Teacher: So we’ve seen how me can mean me, to me or myself and te can mean you, to you or yourself. And
   nos can mean us, to us or ourselves. So we want to resist the temptation to translate this to. So for
   example: he speaks to me, we don’t need this to because me, me, can mean me, to me or myself.
   So we want to resist the temptation to translate that to. So how do you say: he speaks to me or he
   is speaking to me?
Student: Habla me. Sorry, me habla.
Teacher: Yeah, don’t let that to confuse you about the position it should go. It’s still going before, me habla.
   They speak to me:
Student: Me hablan.
Teacher: Good! If you want to say they speak to me about it, you can just say they speak me it in Spanish.
Student: Me lo hablan.
Teacher: Me lo hablan. Very good. They are speaking to me about it. So this to and this about we notice
   Spanish tends not to need these words as much as English does. For example to buy was comprar,
   comprar.
Student: Comprar.
Teacher: Good. So this me other than to me can be for me, from me, we don’t really need these words. So
   for example, if we want to say he buys it for me we can just say he buys me it. So comprar is to
   buy. He buys it for me, he buys me it:
Student: Me lo compra.
Teacher: Good. Me lo compra. So here we see me is like for me here but it’s just me, we are just using me.
   I buy it for you, speaking informally. I buy it for you:
Student: Te lo compro.
Teacher: Good. Te lo compro. Now, if you want to say shall I buy it for you, shall in English, all it's doing
   really is just making it a question. Shall I buy it for you? So in Spanish just make it sound like a
   question.
Student: ¿Te lo compro?
Teacher: Yeah! ¿Te lo compro? Shall I buy it for you? Now this could actually even mean from you. Shall
   I buy it from you? So by the context we will understand the difference. Maybe you will hear if you
   travel to a Spanish speaking country people say “buy me", selling things in the street. “Buy me
   something” is what you will hear. And they are probably not asking you to buy them something
   but to buy something from them. And it’s understood and we don’t really need to use these words
   like from or for most of the time. To do was hacer, hacer. How would you say do you want to do
   (speaking informally)?
Student: Hacer is an irregular verb.
Teacher: It doesn’t matter, does it? Do you want to do?:
Student: Ah! ¿Quieres hacer?
Teacher: Good. Do you want to do it?
Student: ¿Quieres hacerlo?
Teacher: Good. ¿Quieres hacerlo? Now how do you think you would say: do you want to do it for me?:
Student: ¿Me lo quieres hacer?
Teacher: Yes. ¿Me lo quieres hacer? So, we are not using the word for for. We don’t need it in Spanish,
   it’s understood. Do you want to do it for me? ¿Me lo quieres hacer? ¿Quieres hacérmelo? Good.
   The kitchen in Spanish is la cocina, /la cosina/, or in most of Spain, /la cothina/. La cocina.
Student: La cocina.
Teacher: And to cook is cocinar. You just make a verb from cocina, cocinar. Actually this is where we get
   concoction, concoction from in English, “with cooking”. So how would you say I cook from
   cocinar?
Student: Cocino.
Teacher: Good. How do you say he cooks or she cooks or it cooks or usted, you (formal) cook?
Student: Cocina.
Teacher: Good. You (informal)?
Student: Cocinas.
Teacher: Good. And with emphasis or clarification if you want to use the word for you?
Student: Usted.
Teacher: But this is informal, cocinas.
Student: Ah sorry! Tú cocinas.
Teacher: Tú cocinas. Good. They cook or you guys?
Student: Cocinan.
Teacher: Good. What if you wanted to use the word for they, to emphasize or to clarify?
Student: Ellos cocinan.
Teacher: Ellos cocinan. Good. Or ellas if it’s a female group. Or if you wanted to say you guys are cooking
   with the emphasis or the clarification?
Student: Ustedes cocinan.
Teacher: Good. Ustedes cocinan. And we cook? What is we cook?
Student: Cocinamos.
Teacher: Good. And with the emphasis or the clarification?
Student: Nosotros cocinamos.
Teacher: Good. Nosotros cocinamos. Good. How would you say I can? How is I can, related to power?
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: Puedo. Good. And he can:
Student: Puede.
Teacher: Good. Puede. And you can (informal):
Student: Puedes.
Teacher: Good. Can you cook?:
Student: ¿Puedes cocinar?
Teacher: Good. Can you cook something for me? So what was the word for something?
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Good. How do you think you are gonna say this in Spanish? Can you cook something for me?:
Student: ¿Me puedes cocinar algo?
Teacher: Good. ¿Me puedes cocinar algo? ¿Puedes cocinarme algo? Either way. So how would you say
  I have cooked? I have cooked:
Student: He cocinado.
Teacher: He cocinado. Good. So we said that this tense of have cooked, I have cooked instead of I cooked,
  we can use it more in Spanish than in English. So for example in English it sounds much more
  natural to say I cooked at 6 o’clock, but in Spanish it’s not a problem to say I have cooked at 6
  o’clock. So, at 6 o’clock is a las seis. What you actually mean when you say a las seis is a las seis
  horas. “At the six hours”. A little bit like in English when you say “at sixteen hundred hours". A
  las seis. So how would you say I have cooked at 6 o’clock? I cooked at 6 o’clock:
Student: He cocinado a las seis.
Teacher: Good. He cocinado a las seis. I have cooked at six o’clock. I cooked at six o’clock. Good. The
  word for eight in Spanish is ocho. Ocho.
Student: Ocho.
Teacher: Ocho. We have this similar root in octagon, you know, a shape with eight sides. Or octopus, which
  has eight legs. Or in October, which, well now it’s the tenth month, in the Roman calendar there
  were only ten months and October was month number eight. So, ocho, eight. How would you say
  we have cooked at eight o’clock? We have cooked at eight o’clock:
Student: Hemos cocinado a las ocho.
Teacher: Good. Hemos cocinado a las ocho. The word for nine in Spanish is nueve.
Student: Nueve.
Teacher: We can see in November, which used to be the ninth month. The o splits into ue, nueve. And we
   have the same with ten. Ten is diez or /dieth/ in most of Spain. Diez. What does that sound like, if
   you go back to our calendar?
Student: December?
Teacher: December, which used to be the tenth month and of course again an example of splitting. Dec to
   diez. Quedar in Spanish, quedar, means to remain, or to be left over and it actually has quite a
   few other meanings as well, it’s quite a flexible verb, quedar. But for now, to remain or to be left
   over. Q-u-e-d-a-r. Quedar. And q-u in Spanish is always a k sound. You must resist any temptation
   to pronounce /qwedar/, if you were to read this. The word que, the word for what that we learned
   is spelled q-u-e. Quiero is spelled q-u-i-e-r-o. So q-u this combination is always a k. Quedar
   means to remain. So in Spanish if you want to say I stay actually you say I remain myself. This is
   the way you say I stay in Spanish. So we start with remain which is quedar. So how do you say I
   remain?
Student: Quiedo.
Teacher: It doesn’t split here but good for trying.
Student: Quedo?
Teacher: Quedo. I remain myself?
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: Me quedo. This means I stay. Me quedo. Until, until in Spanish is hasta. Hasta. H-a-s-t-a. You
   may have heard hasta la vista. Until the view, literally until the seeing, until we see each other.
   Hasta la vista. So now you can say I am staying here until ten o’clock. So let’s divide it up. I am
   staying here, I remain myself here:
Student: Me quedo aquí.
Teacher: Until?
Student: Hasta.
Teacher: Ten o’clock. So-
Student: Las diez.
Teacher: Yes. Las diez. It’s literally like las diez horas, but you don’t say horas. Maybe historically people
   said it, but not anymore. Me quedo aquí, or acá, hasta las diez. Good. I am staying until ten
   o’clock. So if me quedo, I remain myself is I am staying, how do you think you would say we are
   staying?
Student: Nos quedemos.
Teacher: Good, but now you have some vowel harmony popping in because we were concentrating on the
   other bit, so this mistake managed to come back.
Student: Quedamos?
Teacher: Good! Because it’s quedar. No? Nos quedamos. We remain ourselves. We stay. So we are staying
   until nine o’clock:
Student: Nos quedamos hasta las nueve.
Teacher: Good. Nos quedamos hasta las nueve. Very good. Very good. You stay or you remain yourself
   (speaking informally):
Student: Te quedas.
Teacher: Good. Te quedas. You are staying here:
Student: Te quedas aquí.
Teacher: Te quedas aquí. Are you staying here?:
Student: ¿Te quedas aquí?
Teacher: Good. ¿Te quedas aquí? How would you make it emphatic now? Are YOU staying here?
   Because this te is not emphatic, it is not optional. You have to put this me in me quedo to get the
  meaning of stay and we have to put this te in te quedas to get the meaning of stay. But if we
  want to make it emphatic, what do we add?
Student: Tú te quedas?
Teacher: Good. I am staying, emphatic.
Student: Yo me quedo.
Teacher: Good. Yo me quedo. Good. We are staying:
Student: Nos quedamos.
Teacher: Nos quedamos. Good. WE are staying:
Student: Nosotros nos quedamos.
Teacher: Nosotros nos quedamos. Very good.
 Spanish Track 26
Teacher: So again, You're staying here. Let's make that. You're staying here, informal.
Student: Te quedas aquí.
Teacher: Good. Te quedas aquí. You're not staying here:
Student: No te quedas aquí.
Teacher: No te quedas aquí. Or acá. Now, if you want to make that a question, Aren't you staying here?:
Student: ¿No te quedas aquí?
Teacher: Good. ¿No te quedas aquí? Why aren't you staying here?:
Student: ¿Por qué no te quedas aquí?
Teacher: Very good. What was I go or I'm going? (I'm going on a voyage.)
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Voy. Good. So, how do you think you would say I'm going to stay, I'm going to remain myself?
Student: Voy a quedarme.
Teacher: Good. Until seven, until seven o'clock. Seven is siete, similar to the beginning of September.
   September in Spanish actually is either Septiembre or Setiembre. You have two versions of it in
   Spanish, Septiembre with the p, or without the p, Setiembre. And you can see how siete is like
   the beginning “set” with the split of the e. So, I'm going to stay, I'm going to remain myself until
   seven o'clock. I'm going to stay until seven o'clock:
Student: Voy a quedarme hasta las siete.
Teacher: Good. Voy a quedarme hasta las siete. Very good. How do you say I want to stay?
Student: Quiero quedarme.
Teacher: Good. Quiero quedarme. Do you want to stay? Let's talk informally. Do you want to stay?:
Student: ¿Quieres quedarte?
Teacher: Good. Very good. ¿Quieres quedarte? Do you want to remain yourself? What was I must or I
  owe?
Student: Debo.
Teacher: Debo. Good. What is we owe or we must? And the "to" form is deber. Deber, to owe. So we:
Student: Debemos.
Teacher: Good. We must stay. So, We owe to remain ourselves. We must stay:
Student: Debemos quedarme, quedarnos.
Teacher: Good. Debemos quedarnos. Of course this nos or me or te can come at the beginning as well.
  Nos debemos quedar, debemos quedarnos. Good. What was I have, in the sense of possession?
  So not haber, the other "have"?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. So, if we add on que to tengo, we get the meaning of have to, which is just like debo, but
  less serious sounding. Just like in English. I must stay sounds a little bit more serious than I have
  to stay. And that difference in register, how it feels, is the same in Spanish. So how do you say I
  have to stay?
Student: Tengo que quedarme.
Teacher: Good. And how would you say You have to stay, speaking informally?
Student: Tienes que quedarte.
Teacher: Tienes que quedarte. Good. You have to stay here, informally still:
Student: Tienes que quedarte aquí.
Teacher: Good. I want to know why you have to stay here. I want to know. First bit: don't think about the
  whole sentence, just think of I want:
Student: Quiero saber.
Teacher: Good. Quiero saber. Now forget that bit. Why:
Student: Por qué.
Teacher: You have to stay here:
Student: Tienes que quedarte aquí.
Teacher: Good. Very good. Quiero saber por qué tienes que quedarte aquí. Good. What was I can, or I
  have the power to?
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: Puedo. Good. I can stay:
Student: Puedo quedarme.
Teacher: Good. Puedo quedarme. I can't stay:
Student: No puedo quedarme.
Teacher: Good. No puedo quedarme. Do you remember how to say tonight, or this night?
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. Good. I can't stay tonight:
Student: No puedo quedarme esta noche.
Teacher: Good. No puedo quedarme esta noche. The "to" form of can is poder, poder. And this o is
  splitting when we stress it and say puedo. Poder. So how would you say we can or we are able?
Student: Podemos.
Teacher: Podemos. Very good. We can stay:
Student: Podemos quedarnos.
Teacher: Podemos quedarnos. We can't stay tonight:
Student: No podemos quedarnos esta noche.
Teacher: Good. No podemos quedarnos esta noche. What was to think or to be pensive? To think:
Student: Pensar.
Teacher: Good. Pensar. We think:
Student: Pensamos.
Teacher: Good. You think (informal):
Student: Pensas.
Teacher: Good, it should be pensas, should-
Student: Piensas.
Teacher: Good. Piensas. What do you think?:
Student: ¿Qué piensas?
Teacher: ¿Qué piensas? Good. Now, if we want to say Do you plan on staying here tonight? we can just
   say Do you think to stay here tonight? Ah? Do you think to stay here tonight? So how would we
   say this, informally?
Student: ¿Piensas quedarte aquí esta noche?
Teacher: Good. ¿Piensas quedarte aquí esta noche? Very good. Now how would you say I have stayed?
   I have stayed, or I have remained myself, I have stayed:
Student: He quedado me, He me quedado
Teacher: I don't want you to guess and see what feels good. So with logic you want to place it. And if you're
   wrong, it's fine, because if you got there through a fault of logic, you'll change the logic through
   that mistake. So tell me the rule about where that me can go.
Student: It goes after the "to" form.
Teacher: Mmm.
Student: And before everything else.
Teacher: Before the changed verb. It's very important the way we instruct ourselves. Now I'm giving you
   always the simplest way that we can instruct ourselves accurately. If I tell you "before the verb"
   and you tell yourself "at the beginning", you lose something. Ah, you lose a certain clarity.
Student: Because nouns might come into the sentence and then-
Teacher: Exactly. We have stayed, we have remained ourselves:
Student: Nos hemos quedado.
Teacher: Very good. Nos hemos quedado. We haven't stayed:
Student: No nos hemos quedado.
Teacher: Very good. No nos hemos quedado. You have stayed (informal). You have stayed:
Student: Te has quedado.
Teacher: Good. Te has quedado. Make it a question, Have you stayed?:
Student: ¿Te has quedado?
Teacher: Good. And let's be emphatic now, let's say the word for you.
Student: ¿Tú te has quedado?
Teacher: Good. ¿Tú te has quedado? Let's make it negative now. Haven't you stayed?:
Student: ¿Tú no te has quedado?
Teacher: Good. ¿Tú no te has quedado? Good. Llamar, in Spanish, is to call, or to phone, to telephone,
  llamar. l-l, which we said is pronounced like y in most of the Spanish speaking world. To call.
Student: Llamar.
Teacher: How do you say I call?
Student: Llamo.
Teacher: Llamo. If you want to introduce yourself, instead of saying My name is, in Spanish it's much more
  common to say I call myself.
Student: Me llamo.
Teacher: Me llamo. And then you can introduce yourself. Me llamo Mihalis, for example. How would you
  say You call yourself (informal)?
Student: Te llamas.
Teacher: Good. Te llamas. If you want to ask the name, you will say How do you call yourself? And the
  word for how is cómo. Cómo.
Student: Cómo.
Teacher: So how do you say How do you call yourself?:
Student: ¿Cómo te llamas?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cómo te llamas? You might have heard this around and not understood actually how it's
  being constructed. Now we understand it. It's How do you call yourself? ¿Cómo te llamas?
Spanish Track 27
Teacher: How would you say the situation in Spanish?
Student: La situación.
Teacher: Good. -ión is a feminine ending, so the word takes la for the. La situación. Good. Now in Spanish,
   adjectives are describing words. Adjectives are words that describe, like big or yellow or happy.
   Words that we can put is in front of are adjectives, describing words. These words come after the
   noun they describe in Spanish. So instead of saying, “the global situation" for example, you say
   “the situation global". There's a bit of flexibility for emphasis as well, but the normal standard
   position is to come after the noun. So how would you say the global situation?
Student: La situación global.
Teacher: Good. La situación global. How would you say digital camera? Digital camera:
Student: Cámara digital.
Teacher: Yeah. Cámara digital. Good. Cámara is feminine, so a digital camera is una cámara digital.
   So we have la for the, and una for a. So how would you say, I want to buy a digital camera? What
   was the verb to buy?
Student: Comprar.
Teacher: Good. So I want to buy a digital camera:
Student: Quiero comprar una cámara digital.
Teacher: Good. Quiero comprar una cámara digital. How would you say I want to buy the digital camera?
Student: Quiero comprar la cámara digital.
Teacher: Good. Quiero comprar la cámara digital. What if you wanted to say, I want to buy it and with
   the it, you meant the digital camera?
Student: Quiero comprarla.
Teacher: Good. So this la is it. There's a lot of words in Spanish for car depending on where you are. It's
   one of the words that changes a lot between the dialects, but I think everybody understands all of
   the words that are heard. You might hear coche, which is related to coach; carro, which of course
   is car, carro, so we have two r's in carro, that's why we have this rolling r. You might hear auto,
   where do you think auto comes from?
Student: Automobile.
Teacher: Of course, and it exists: automóbil. But people will say auto. You might even hear máquina,
   which means machine. So machine, the car, máquina. This is another example of the q-u spelling
   producing k sound. M-a-q-u-i-n-a. Máquina.
Student: Máquina.
Teacher: Good. So there's a few words there for car, and you might hear others as well. Coche is masculine,
   so how would you say the car?
Student: El coche.
Teacher: Good. A for masculine words is un. U-n. Un. So, a car:
Student: Un coche.
Teacher: The machine? Does máquina look masculine or feminine?
Student: Feminine.
Teacher: Good. So the machine:
Student: La máquina.
Teacher: La máquina. A machine:
Student: Una máquina.
Teacher: Good. And does carro look masculine or feminine?
Student: Masculine.
Teacher: Good. So the car:
Student: El carro.
Teacher: El carro. A car:
Student: Un carro.
Teacher: Un carro. Good. So it's the noun that has the gender, not the object. Of course it's not the car that
   is masculine or feminine, it's the noun, it’s the word itself. So even though all of these words refer
   to car, some are masculine and some are feminine. Big, in Spanish, is grande, grande. Of course
   we can relate this to grand in English, grande. So using any of these words that you like, how
   would you say, the big car?
Student: La máquina grande.
Teacher: Good. La máquina grande. So la máquina grande, el auto grande. Now if you say the big cars,
   this adjective is also going to become plural. How do you say the house?
Student: La casa.
Teacher: Good. And how was the houses?
Student: Las casas.
Teacher: Good, so la also became plural. So las casas, if you say the big houses, big is also going to become
   plural.
Student: Grandes.
Teacher: So how would you say the big houses?
Student: Las casas grandes.
Teacher: Good. Las casas grandes. The big car, using auto:
Student: El auto grande.
Student: Good. El auto grande. The cars, using auto, so a masculine word, you say los autos. So el
   becomes los in plural. So how would you say the big cars?
Student: Los autos grandes.
Teacher: Los autos grandes. Los carros grandes. Good. If you want to say Can you see the big car? you
   can say, can you see?, or in Spanish you can just say, do you see? We kind of overuse this can a
   lot in English. So, Do you see the big car?:
Student: You informal? ¿Ves el coche grande?
Teacher: Good. You needed some time there to look at ves. And this was the more common way actually,
   of saying it in Spanish: ¿Ves el auto grande? But, if you didn't have that time to think about it,
   even though it's more natural to say it like this it really doesn't matter; you can say can you see…
   Now you would probably be quicker at building can you see than you see because can is something
   very common that you're going to be using all the time. So in conversation, where you just want
   to get the meaning across, you might want to use this. So how would you say can you see the big
   car?:
Student: ¿Puedes ver el coche grande?
Teacher: Good. So puedo, quiero, tengo que, debo, these verbs that are followed by two versions that
   you're going to be using a lot, even though the sentence is longer, they are short cuts. They are
   short cuts in thought. And once you become very confident with that, you're going to start noticing
   that people say things differently to you. So instead of I can't find it, I don't find it. You will notice
   that yourself and your speech will adjust, but in the beginning what you're trying to do is to be
   conversational and correct structurally. Once you get over that hurdle of being communicative,
   you're going to start noticing that people say things differently to you. So instead of I can't find it,
   I don't find it. So you could say, I can't find it. How would you say I can't find it? What was to
   find, or to encounter?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. So say I can't find it:
Student: No puedo encontrarlo.
Teacher: Good. No puedo encontrarlo. This would be the short cut even though it's longer, it's much easier
   to build no puedo encontrarlo because puedo is something you're going to be using all the time,
   and encontrar is in the “to" form. I don't find it, how would that be?
Student: No lo encuentro.
Teacher: No lo encuentro. Good. So it's very useful to bear in mind these verbs like puedo, debo, which
   we can use with “to" forms which give us a short cut and allow us to get conversational very
   quickly. What was to remain?
Student: Quedar.
Teacher: Quedar. Good. And I remain myself is how we get the meaning of I stay. So how do you say I
   stay?
Student: Quedarme.
Teacher: I remain myself. I remain myself. What's to remain?
Student: Quedar.
Teacher: What's I remain?
Student: Quedo.
Teacher: Uh-huh. What's I remain myself?
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: What was happening?
Student: I was thinking “okay the me should go first, but it can't go first because the verb is in the ’to’ form”.
   And I just got stuck.
Teacher: Well you start when you're building the sentence with the verb. With who's doing that. So if you
   start with that, then it's not in the “to" form anymore. The order of thought is very important; the
   verb is the backbone. That's the first place you want to go: quedo. I remain myself: me quedo. So
   me quedo is I stay. The word for red in Spanish is rojo. Rojo. This is spelled r-o-j-o. And j's in
   Spanish are pronounced /kh/. Like this, rojo.
Student: Rojo.
Teacher: And we have the initial r, so if you can do it, it will be the rolling r. Rojo.
Student: Rojo.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I'm staying in the red car? I'm staying in the car red. The word for
   in is en. E-n. So let's divide it up: I'm staying, only think about that bit. I'm staying, I remain myself:
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: In:
Student: En.
Teacher: The red car, the car red. And let's use the word auto for car for now. So I'm staying in the red car,
   the car red:
Student: Me quedo en el auto rojo.
Teacher: Good. Me quedo en el auto rojo. Good. How would you say I have stayed in the red car? I have
   stayed, I have remained myself in the red car. Again we want to divide it up. I have remained
   myself. There's a lot to think about there, in that first bit.
Student: Me he quedado.
Teacher: Uh-huh. In the red car:
Student: En el auto rojo.
Teacher: Good. How would you say I have bought a red car? What is the verb to buy?
Student: Comprer.
Teacher: Comprar.
Student: Comprar. Comprar.
Teacher: Comprar.
Teacher: So I have bought a red car, and let's use auto. I have bought a red car:
Student: He comprado un auto rojo.
Teacher: Good. He comprado un, (masculine word), un, un auto rojo. How would you say I have bought
   myself a red car?
Student: Me he comprado un auto rojo.
Teacher: Me he comprado un auto rojo. I have bought myself a red car. Very good.
  Spanish Track 28
Teacher: Spanish dialects don't change very much. Slang changes a lot, but Spanish is pretty standard. It's
   not like Arabic for example, where you have such a different Arabic in Morocco to Egypt, for
   example. All of the different Spanishes are completely mutually intelligible. But in slang, you get
   many different terms and words and car is one of these words that have different versions. Money
   is another one. You might hear dinero, which is like the standard word; you might hear plata,
   which actually means silver; pasta you might hear pasta, that's one they use that in Spain. So we
   had a few words for car. Do you remember any of them?
Student: Máquina, auto, caro.
Teacher: Carro. Two r's. Let's stay with carro. How would you say the car?
Student: El carro.
Teacher: El carro. And how would you say, a car?
Student: Un carro.
Teacher: Un carro. Good. So it's a masculine word, and we use el for the, and un for a. What if we say, the
   cars?
Student: Los carros.
Teacher: Good. Los carros. So the plural of el is los. It's a little bit different, el to los. The word for expensive
   is caro. So it's like carro, but with one r. Caro.
Student: Caro.
Teacher: So again it's a nice bit to feel the difference between having the single r and the double r, just as
   we saw in pero, meaning but and perro meaning dog. So how would you say, the car is expensive?
Student: El carro es caro.
Teacher: Good. El carro es caro. Good. So es we said was it is, she is, he is or just is. Or you are, talking
   to usted. Talking formally. So if you just wanted to say it is expensive:
Student: Es caro.
Teacher: Good. And what if you were talking about a feminine thing?
Student: Es cara.
Teacher: Es cara. And when I say feminine thing I really mean a feminine noun. If you're referring in your
  mind to a feminine noun, because if you, in your country, call cars máquinas, then you're going
  to say es cara. But if you call them autos, then you're going to say es caro. So it refers to the word
  more than the object, to the noun, the gender of the noun. So es we have for is, and for they are,
  or you guys are - we know they always come together - we have son. Son. S-o-n.
Student: Son.
Teacher: Son. So if you want to say the cars are expensive, and we will use carro again. So the cars are
  expensive:
Student: Los carros son caro- caros.
Teacher: Good. Los carros son caros. Good. What if you use a feminine word like máquina, how's it going
  to be? The cars are expensive:
Student: Las máquinas son caras.
Teacher: Good. Las máquinas son caras. And the car is expensive: Using again máquina.
Student: La máquina es caro - cara.
Teacher: Good. La máquina es cara. The word teacher in Spanish is professor. Profesor.
Student: Profesor.
Teacher: Profesor. So how would you say, he is a professor? And we don't need to say “a”, we can just say
  he is professor.
Student: Es profesor.
Teacher: Good. Es profesor. What if you wanted to say, she is a professor? What do you think might
  happen?
Student: Es profesora?
Teacher: Good. Es profesora. What if you wanted to say, they are teachers, and you mean a group of
   females?
Student: Son profesoras.
Teacher: Son profesoras. Good. So, this is a noun, profesor. It's a word you can put the or a in front of.
   Now, we said that adjectives, they change for gender if they end in -o. If they don't, they don't.
   For example, the global situation was:
Student: La global situación.
Teacher: Where does that global go?
Student: La situación global.
Teacher: La situación global. So situación is feminine, but we're not saying “globala”. Adjectives, these
   describing words that we can put is in front of, they only change if they end in -o. But nouns, they
   can change to feminine like profesor/profesora to differentiate. So this is why it's important to
   know what type of word we're dealing with. We're doing this already, but we don't even realize it.
   The moment we come in contact with a verb, we know exactly what to do. We know it's a verb,
   and we know how to manage it. We don't start trying to make a verb masculine or feminine, for
   example. So we are already making this differentiation, but we want to do it more consciously to
   get more control. So this is a noun. Doctor, what do you think that means?
Student: Doctor.
Teacher: Good. Is it a noun, is it an adjective, is it a verb? What is it?
Student: Noun.
Teacher: Noun. So how do you think feminine, a female doctor, will be?
Student: Doctora?
Teacher: Good. Doctora. We just stick an a. Good. So how would you say he is a doctor?
Student: Es doctor.
Teacher: Good. She is a doctor:
Student: Es doctora.
Teacher: Good. Now, if you want to get the plural of professor, profesor, or doctor, doctor, or any other
   word in Spanish that ends in a consonant, you don't add s; you add -es. so how do you think it
   would sound, the plural of profesor?
Student: Profesores.
Teacher: Good. Profesores. So this is the plural for masculine or for mixed. The plural for feminine:
Student: Profesoras.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say they are professors? And you mean a masculine or mixed group.
Student: Son profesores.
Teacher: Good. Son profesores. And if they were all female?
Student: Son profesoras.
Teacher: Good. They are doctors: mixed or masculine:
Student: Son doctores.
Teacher: Good. Son doctores. What if they were females?
Student: Son doctoras.
Teacher: Good. Son doctoras. Good. Words ending -ive in English, i-v-e, tend to become -ivo, i-v-o for
   masculine singular. This is the one we always start from though and build from, this masculine
   singular, or neuter let's say. So for example addictive becomes adictivo. Now when I say neuter,
   we don't really have a neuter in Spanish, we have masculine and feminine. But the concept of
   neuter exists. For example, if I say it's addictive, and I'm referring to living in the mountains, is
   addictive; eating healthily is addictive or something like this, then I use the masculine singular.
   So how would you say it's addictive?
Student: Es adictivo.
Teacher: Good. Es adictivo. How would you say he is positive?
Student: Es positivo.
Teacher: Good. And you pronounced an s where most English speakers will probably find themselves
   pronouncing a z there because in English we have positive, so that would probably transfer into
   Spanish to /pozitivo/ and we want to be careful not to do that. Positivo with an s. Positivo. She is
   positive:
Student: Es positiva.
Teacher: Good. They are positive:
Student: Son positivos.
Teacher: Good. They are intuitive:
Student: Son intuitivos.
Teacher: Good. Son intuitivos. What if you meant women?
Student: Intuitivas.
Teacher: Good. Son intuitivas. She is very attractive: The word for very is muy, and it's spelled m-u-y.
   The y you can imagine it like an i. Muy.
Student: Muy.
Teacher: Good. So she is very attractive:
Student: Es muy atractivo- oh, atractiva.
Teacher: Atractiva.
Student: Es muy atractiva.
Teacher: Good. Atractiva is showing us that it refers to a female. So this would probably help us work out
   who we are talking about. But, maybe we would want to say, to clarify or to emphasize or to
   contrast. So how would you say that, using the word for she? She is very attractive:
Student: I always get confused on that, if it's el or if it's la or ella.
Teacher: So I want you to spend some time to think about it, and not guess. Think about which is which,
   make a decision.
Student: Her is la.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Ella es muy atractiva.
Teacher: Good. Ella es muy atractiva. How would you say, she is very creative?
Student: Ella es muy creativa.
Teacher: But, she's aggressive:
Student: Pero, es, is it “aggressiva”? I was thinking of the double g, does it stay?
Teacher: Well these random double letters that we don't need in English really, they just become single
   letters in Spanish. So I think there's a double s there as well in English, well that would also become
   singular. The only double letters that cross over are the r's and the n's. Like connotación.
Student: Oh double n's.
Teacher: “Con-notación”. If you get a double f, double s, double g, these random double letters you get in
   English; they don't cross over into Spanish.
   How would you say, they are aggressive, talking about a masculine or mixed group?
Student: Son agresivos.
Teacher: Good. And what if you wanted to use the word for they?
Student: Ellos son agresivos.
Teacher: Good. How would you say, he is negative?
Student: Es negativo.
Teacher: Good, and if you use the word for he?
Student: Él es negativo.
Teacher: Good. He is very negative:
Student: Es muy negativo.
Teacher: How would you say, It's intensive?
Student: Es intensivo.
Teacher: Good. So we use the neuter there, we don't know what we're talking about. So we can just use the
  masculine singular, which is also like neuter. Es intensivo. How would you say, they are natives?
Student: Son nativos.
Teacher: Good. Son nativos. And what if it was a female group?
Student: Son nativas.
Teacher: Very good.
  Spanish Track 29
Teacher: So I want to talk about something now that's different in Spanish. And first I want to speak about
   what this means; rather than an obstacle to learning, it's part of the experience of learning a new
   language which can make you realize that in your own language you are both permitted and obliged
   to perceive and express the world in a certain way. There's two important, kind of contradictory
   concepts here almost. It permits you and obliges you, it allows you and requires you, to perceive
   and to express the world in a certain way. So, in Spanish we have two verbs for to be. So remember
   to be is is, am, are; we get all of this from to be. We don't say I be; we say I am. So we have ser.
   This is where es comes from; this is where son comes from. And ser is about characteristics. When
   we refer to the characteristics of something. Actually un ser is a being. We said that some form of
   the verb is often the noun; here it's the complete form. Un ser is a being. Un ser humano is what?
Student: A human being.
Teacher: A human being. And we could have found humano, even though there's no rule to find humano,
   that word, we have humanity. The words with -ity end how in Spanish?
Student: Humanidad.
Teacher: Humanidad. And then we can probably guess then that human is humano. Un ser humano is a
   human being. So ser refers to things that are characteristic of something. Then estar, which is the
   other to be, estar, refers to states - states we are in. The word state is related to estar. So Spanish
   permits us, allows us, but also obliges us, when we are perceiving and expressing the world around
   us, to make a decision and to think about something. Is this a state, or is it a characteristic? So this
   kind of sounds very abstract right now, so let's look at some examples. To be tired: do you think
   this is a state? Or do you think it's a characteristic of you, to be tired? Is it a state you're in, or is it
   a characteristic of you?
Student: It's a state.
Teacher: Good. Where you are: is it a state you are in or is it a characteristic of you? Where you are.
Student: A state.
Teacher: A state. To be a good or a bad person: do you think this is a characteristic of you or a state?
Student: Characteristic.
Teacher: Characteristic. So it's very very important to kind of snub out now any temptation that you might
   have to simplify this to temporary and permanent. This is what most learners do, and actually what
   many teachers do: simplify this concept to temporary and permanent. Which, if you think about it
   this way, will work most of the time, but not all of the time. We want to think in this way, is it a
   state or is it a characteristic? For example if I say I am a student, it's not very permanent is it? But
   is it a state or a characteristic? My profession or my occupation.
Student: It should be a state you're in.
Teacher: It's temporary but that doesn't make it a state. Your profession, according to Spanish, is
   characteristic of you. Even if you do it for five minutes.
Student: I guess it's the same, for example, as you said before with the word aggressive. Someone can be
   aggressive and they can change, so that stops it from being permanent. But it's still a characteristic.
Teacher: Exactly. And we will see actually some adjectives we can use with both ser and estar to give
   different meanings. But the great bulk of them go with one or the other. This is Spanish
   conceptually deciding whether it's a characteristic or a state; forcing us to make this differentiation
   and to express it. Let's look at the forms, lets look at the forms of estar to begin. Now I am from
   estar is estoy. Estoy. So it ends -oy. We already saw another verb that ends -oy which is voy: I go
   or I'm going. Estoy.
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: Estoy. Now to be is a very irregular verb in most languages. Look at English: from to be we get
   am, is, are, was. But this is actually not so irregular. We have this little irregularity -oy, estoy.
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: And the other irregularity that we have is that this verb is the only verb in the entire Spanish
   language that doesn't have the accent on the penultimate syllable in the present tense. So it's not
   “éstoy” it's estoy; the accent is on the ending. This hasn't happened until now, and it won't happen
   again. So we have estar and from estar we have estoy. Now, all of the other forms are regular.
   We build them how we would expect to, with the exception that the accent will be on the last
  syllable. And it's the only verb in the entire present tense that has this characteristic. So how would
  you say he is / she is / it is / you are, from estar, using estar?
Student: Está.
Teacher: Está. They or for you guys:
Student: Están.
Teacher: Good. And make it for you (informal):
Student: Estás.
Teacher: Good. And for the “we” version, the accent is where it should be because we're adding two
  syllables. So give me the “we” version.
Student: Estamos.
Teacher: Estamos. So that's it, that's your set. Estoy, está, están, estás, estamos. The word for tired is
  cansado, cansado.
Student: Cansado.
Teacher: C-a-n-s-a-d-o. Cansado.
Student: Cansado.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say, I am tired? This is a state.
Student: Estoy cansada.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Estoy cansada.
Teacher: Estoy cansada. Good. We are tired, talking about a mixed or a masculine group?
Student: Estamos cansados.
Teacher: Good. Estamos cansados. What if you are an all female group?
Student: Estamos cansadas.
Teacher: Good. Now the word for always we said was siempre. Siempre. Now if you say, I'm always tired,
  because tired as an adjective, as an idea, is a state, not a characteristic, because we are looking at
  that whether it's a state or a characteristic, rather than is it permanent or is it temporary, we're using
  estar. So even if you say I'm always tired it doesn't matter, you still use estar. So siempre is very
  flexible in this sentence, you can put it anywhere. The emphasis is going to change when you move
  it, but it's legal anywhere. So how would you say, I'm always tired?
Student: Estoy cansada siempre.
Teacher: Good. Estoy cansada siempre. Estoy siempre cansada. Siempre estoy cansada. Or I would say
  cansado. Good. So we want to resist the temptation to simplify this concept to “temporary” and
  “permanent”. We want to ask ourself “is it a state, or is it a characteristic?” To be tired: is it a state
  or is it a characteristic? If we simplify it to temporary and permanent, most of the time it's going
  to work, this simplification. But many times we're going to feel frustrated, feeling like there's
  something we don't understand because Spanish disagrees with us. If we have the concepts of
  characteristic and state, the few times Spanish disagrees with what we consider a characteristic
  and state it's going to be an interesting point of perspective. For example, muerto.
  Which means:
Student: Dead.
Teacher: Dead. Good. We looked at this briefly before as a part of mortgage, meaning death-pact. Muerto,
  in Spanish, is a state. Death is a state. So if you want to say I'm dead, you would use estar. So how
  would you say that?
Student: Estoy muerta.
Teacher: Good. Estoy muerta. And I would say estoy muerto. And you can use it to say, I'm very tired as
  well. Estoy muerta, estoy muerto. I'm very tired. Good.
 Spanish Track 30
Teacher: The word for how in Spanish is cómo.
Student: Cómo.
Teacher: Cómo. How do you think you would say, how are you?, talking informally?
Student: ¿Cómo estás?
Teacher: ¿Cómo estás? Because when you ask somebody how they are, you're referring to their state.
  ¿Cómo estás? And formally, how would you ask?
Student: ¿Cómo está?
Teacher: Good. And if you're asking more than one person?
Student: ¿Cómo están?
Teacher: Very nice. The word for where is dónde. So how would you say, where are you?, talking
  informally?
Student: ¿Dónde estás?
Teacher: ¿Dónde estás? I don't know where we are. So what was I don't know?
Student: No sé?
Teacher: No sé. Good. I don't know where we are:
Student: So no sé donde estamos.
Teacher: Good. No sé donde estamos. Good. How would you say, I am here?
Student: Estoy aquí.
Teacher: Estoy aquí, Estoy acá. How would you say, I want to be here?
Student: Quiero estar aquí.
Teacher: Good. Quiero estar aquí. Good. How would you say, I'm going to be here later? What was the
  word for late?
Student: Tarde.
Teacher: Tarde. Good. And later or more late?
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Good. So I'm going to be here later:
Student: Voy a estar aquí más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Voy a estar aquí más tarde. Voy is I go or I'm going. How do you say you go or you are
   going, speaking informally?
Student: Vas.
Teacher: Vas. Good. So how would you say, where are you going to be? So break it up: where are you
   going to be?:
Student: ¿Dónde vas a estar?
Teacher: Yes. ¿Dónde vas a estar? Where are you going to be? Good. So let's run through the forms again,
   and let's use the words for emphasis just to practice them. So I am is:
Student: Yo estoy.
Teacher: Good. Yo estoy. He is:
Student: Él está.
Teacher: Good. Él está. She is:
Student: Ella está.
Teacher: Good. And you (talking formally) are:
Student: Usted está.
Teacher: Usted está. Good. They are, using the word for they:
Student: Ellos están.
Teacher: Ellos están. Or for feminine:
Student: Ellas están.
Teacher: Good. What is we are?
Student: Nosotros estamos.
Teacher: Good. And for feminine:
Student: Nosotros, nosotras estamos.
Teacher: Good. So nosotros changes to nosotras. You are, talking informally:
Student: Estás.
Teacher: Good. And if we used the word for you:
Student: Tú estás.
Teacher: Good. Tú estás. Tú estás. Good. How would you ask more than one person, where do you have
   to be later? So the first bit is where.
Student: Dónde.
Teacher: Do you have?, and we are talking to you (plural), which is the same as they. Do you have? Yeah,
   what's to have?
Student: Tener.
Teacher: Tener. Good. And we have it as -tain in words like maintain-mantener, contain-contener,
   sustain-sostener, entertain-entretener, obtain-obtener. That will help us. So first we want to
   build you guys have from tener.
Student: Tienen.
Teacher: Good. So where do you have to be later, to you (plural). Try it.
Student: Dónde tienen están.
Teacher: Slower.
Student: Oh sorry, to be, it's in the, yes. Dónde, and I’ve forgotten the other one now.
Teacher: It's okay, work it out again.
Student: Dónde tienen estar.
Teacher: There is something we need to add to tienen to get this meaning of have to, and it's not a
   comfortable translation.
Student: Dónde tienen que estar.
Teacher: Later:
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: ¿Dónde tienen que estar más tarde? Good. You might want to say, he must be here, and you can
   use this in the same way as you do in English, to refer to probability. Oh, he must be here by now,
   or something like this. You have the same use in Spanish. And must is the same as to owe, which
   is related to debt. So what was to owe?
Student: Deber.
Teacher: Deber. Good. So he owes or he must:
Student: Debe.
Teacher: Debe. This e doesn't split. Good. Debe. So he must be here:
Student: Debe estar aquí.
Teacher: Good. And he must be tired:
Student: Debe estar cansado.
Teacher: Good. Debe estar cansado. They must be tired:
Student: Deben estar cansados.
Teacher: Very good. What if they were females?
Student: Cansadas.
Teacher: All together. Don't miss the fun.
Student: Deben estar cansadas.
Teacher: Good. Deben estar cansadas. To remain was quedar. Quedar.
Student: Quedar.
Teacher: And to get the meaning of I stay, we say, I remain myself. So how would that sound? I remain
  myself:
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: Me quedo. I am staying. How would we are staying, or we remain ourselves, be?
Student: Nos quedamos.
Teacher: Good. We are not going to stay, because we are very tired. We are not going to stay, because we
  are very tired. So the first bit that needs to command all of our attention is we are not going:
Student: No vamos.
Teacher: No vamos. We are not going to stay, so we are not going to remain ourselves:
Student: No vamos a quedarnos.
Teacher: Good. No vamos a quedarnos or no nos vamos a quedar. You can have this as well. No nos
  vamos a quedar. Because, same as why:
Student: Porque.
Teacher: Porque. We are very tired. And let's be a masculine or a mixed group. We are very tired:
Student: Estamos muy cansados.
Teacher: Good, now all together and not from memory. Thinking about it again, block by block. If you rush
  it, you will trip and tripping is very time-consuming. So, we are not going to remain ourselves. To
  stay:
Student: No vamos a quedarnos.
Teacher: Good. Because we are very tired.
Student: Porque estamos muy cansados.
Teacher: Well done. No vamos a quedarnos, no nos vamos a quedar porque, estamos muy cansados.
  Very good.
Spanish Track 31
Teacher: We spoke about how we have two verbs for to be in Spanish, estar and ser. And we practiced with
   estar, which is the verb that we use for states. And we said that the word state is related to estar.
   Actually, it's like the same word. What looks most different there between state and estar is that
   /eh/ that you get at the beginning of estar. But you will find this actually with words that start st-,
   sp-, s- and consonant. You can't begin a word like this in Spanish, where you can in English. So,
   actually, you will find many words between English and Spanish that get like an extra e at the
   beginning in Spanish. For example, the word Spanish in Spanish is Español. Or Spain, which is
   España. Student - estudiante. School - escuela. There you have the o splitting of school to ue.
   Escuela. Special - especial. Spatial:
Student: Espacial.
Teacher: Good. Espacial. Strict: how do you think you might say strict, if it's the same word in English and
   Spanish?
Student: Estricto.
Teacher: Estricto. Good. Spectacular. It's the same word as well.
Student: Espectacular.
Teacher: Good. Espectacular. So this is the difference that we see between state and estar. So we said that
   estar we use with what we will consider states of being. Now with what we consider characteristics
   of being, we will use ser. And we said that ser, all by itself, means being. Un ser is a being. Un
   ser humano is a human being. Here, humano is acting like an adjective, so it's coming afterwards.
   But it could also be a noun. We can say the human. How would that be? The human:
Student: El humano.
Teacher: El humano. And there it's a noun. But el ser humano, there it's an adjective. So I am, from ser, is
   soy. Soy.
Student: Soy.
Teacher: So like estoy from estar, it ends o-y. There are just four verbs in the whole spanish language that
   use oy instead of o, for I. Voy, doy from dar, to give, doy, I am giving, and then estoy and soy.
   So we said that student is estudiante. So if you wanted to say I am a student:
Student: Soy estudiante.
Teacher: Good. Soy estudiante. It is or she is, he is, you are, to usted. We learned it already, but we didn't
   learn that it was from ser. How would you say It is possible?
Student: Es posible.
Teacher: Es posible. Good. So we have es. Es is from ser. Now, ser is more irregular than estar. Doesn't
   look like es is from ser, not too much. And then we had they are, or you guys are. What was that?
Student: Son.
Teacher: Son. Good. So, we've got three of the versions now. Soy, son, and es. We can take son and we can
   work out the "we" form from son, working backwards. Now we said that working backwards
   means taking off the consonant that you know associates to they, then bumping on the ending that
   associates to we, for example. So, to go from son, they are, to we are. How do you think it will
   sound?
Student: Somos.
Teacher: Somos. Good. Which leaves one left, which is the you (informal). Which is eres. Eres. E-r-e-s.
Student: Eres.
Teacher: Eres. So let's make a recap. To be:
Student: Ser.
Teacher: I am:
Student: Soy.
Teacher: Soy. And if you want to use the word for I:
Student: Yo soy.
Teacher: Yo soy. He is:
Student: Es.
Teacher: Good. And if you want to use the word for he:
Student: Él es.
Teacher: Good. And she is:
Student: Ella es.
Teacher: They are:
Student: Son.
Teacher: Son, and what if you wanted to use the word for they? A nice way to remember they as well, is
   you can make she plural and you will get the feminine they.
Student: Ellas.
Teacher: So they are:
Student: Ellos son.
Teacher: Good. Ellos son, ellas son. Good. You guys are. What is you (formal)?
Student: Usted.
Teacher: Good, and you guys is the plural of that:
Student: Ustedes.
Teacher: Ustedes. So it's the plural of usted, but it's not necessarily formal. Ustedes. Only in some parts of
   Spain, which we will talk about later. But everywhere else in the Spanish speaking world, this is
   just how you refer to you guys. It doesn't sound formal any more when it becomes plural. So how
   would you say you guys are?
Student: Ustedes son.
Teacher: Ustedes son. Good. Then we have we are:
Student: Nosotros somos.
Teacher: Good. Somos or nosotros somos, or if we were an all female group?
Student: Nosotras somos.
Teacher: Nosotras somos. Good. And then we have the you (informal), which is eres, which is probably
   the weirdest form out of these ones. We can relate it to es maybe, they are similar, es, eres. So how
   would you say you are, using the word for you?
Student: Tú eres.
Teacher: Tú eres. Good. What was the word for how?
Student: Cómo.
Teacher: Cómo. Now if I want to say How is he?, How is he doing? I will use estar. So how would I say,
   using estar, how is he, how is he doing?:
Student: ¿Cómo está?
Teacher: ¿Cómo está? Good. Now if I want to ask you, what is he like? Maybe you tell me about your new
   boss or a new friend, and I ask you, what is he like, or what is she like? Am I referring to their state
   or to their characteristic?
Student: Characteristic.
Teacher: So how would I ask How is he, what is he like? How is she, what is she like?:
Student: ¿Cómo es?
Teacher: ¿Cómo es? Good.
Spanish Track 32
Teacher: The word for boring or bored is aburrido. Aburrido.
Student: Aburrido.
Teacher: A-b-u-r-r-i-d-o. Aburrido.
Student: Aburrido.
Teacher: Now this is boring or bored. One of these words in English is a characteristic and the other one is
   a state. Which is which? Boring, if I say you are boring, is it a state or a characteristic?
Student: Characteristic.
Teacher: And if I say you are bored, is it a state or a characteristic?
Student: A state.
Teacher: A state. So in English we have two different words to express this difference whereas in Spanish
   you will just decide whether you are going to use ser or estar. So, you will have to think about it.
   How will you say, it is boring?
Student: Es aburrido.
Teacher: Es aburrido. Good. He is bored, is it a characteristic or a state?
Student: A state.
Teacher: Good. So, he is bored:
Student: Está aburrido.
Teacher: Está aburrido. But he is boring:
Student: Es aburrido.
Teacher: Good. And she is boring:
Student: Es aburrido. Oh sorry, ella es aburrido.
Teacher: Spanish is more subtle than that.
Student: Es aburrida.
Teacher: Es aburrida. They are boring:
Student: Son aburridos.
Teacher: Son aburridos. They are bored:
Student: Están aburridos.
Teacher: Good. Están aburridos. So with some adjectives we get a different meaning depending on whether
   we use ser or estar. The word for from in Spanish is de. From or of, de. De.
Student: De.
Teacher: We get this forming part of many Latin-English words, for example, deliver. The de- of deliver is
   actually from. -liver is to do with freedom, like liberation, liberación. How would you say to
   liberate?
Student: Liberar.
Teacher: Good. Libre is free in Spanish. So again we see this grey area between v and b, between English
   and Spanish, between libre and -liver in deliver just as we did between savvy and saber for
   example, so deliver is like from or of freeing, which has much more sense if you look at the original
   meanings of deliver, like to deliver a baby, deliver me from evil, rather than to deliver a package,
   which is a much more modern meaning. You can see much more the ideology in the vocabulary
   with the older uses. Another interesting word that we can see this de in, in English, is decipher for
   example. Decipher is actually a combination of Arabic and Latin. You have de meaning of or from,
   and “cipher” from “sifr” which means zero in Arabic. So to decipher is to go from zero, or
   something like this. So anyway we have de for from or of. Now, if I want to ask, where is he from?
   Is it a characteristic or a state, where you are from?
Student: A characteristic.
Teacher: Yes, it's not where you are, it's where you are from, this is characteristic of you. So in Spanish we
   are going to say, from where are you, from where is he, from where is she? This is the word order.
   So, from where is what?
Student: De dónde.
Teacher: De dónde. From where is he? From where are you (formal)? et cetera?
Student: ¿De dónde es?
Teacher: ¿De dónde es? And you informal. You remember how was you are, you informal. It's kind of
   similar to es:
Student: ¿De dónde eres?
Teacher: ¿De dónde eres? So this sentence actually will help you remember this kind of irregular form eres
   because you will hear it all the time. ¿De dónde eres? From where are you, where are you from?
   How would you say, where are they from?:
Student: ¿De dónde son?
Teacher: ¿De dónde son? But if you want to ask, where are they? Their location, where are they? How
   would you ask?
Student: ¿Dónde están?
Teacher: Good, ¿Donde están? Because now we refer to a state. Good. So, we have this adjective as well,
   libre, like in deliver and liberation, libre, which means free. Again, we might mean a state or we
   might mean a characteristic. Now sometimes, to show the difference, we might not just use ser
   and estar, we might actually also change the way we say it. So for example, if you want to say I
   am free, and you mean from your exams, from work, do you think you mean a state or a
   characteristic?
Student: A state.
Teacher: A state. So how would you say that, I am free?
Student: Estoy libre.
Teacher: Good. Estoy libre. And libre does not change for masculine and feminine because it ends e. Only
   adjectives ending o will change. Estoy libre. Good. Now if you mean as a characteristic, as a
   characteristic of your personality, you are a free person, then you might say:
Student: Soy libre.
Teacher: Soy libre. You might also say, I am a free person. So person is persona, and you could say, I am
  a - what's a person?
Student: Una persona.
Teacher: Good. I am a free person:
Student: Soy una persona libre.
Teacher: Good. Soy una persona libre. Persona is feminine, not because of you, because the word is
  feminine. So I, as a male, would also say, soy una persona libre. So it's the noun in itself, persona,
  that is feminine. So in this case, with libre, there's no problem to move between ser and estar.
  You can use libre with ser or with estar to give slightly different meanings. So some adjectives
  you will be able to move between ser and estar and others you won't. If you want to get around
  that uncertainty, instead of trying out soy libre you could just say soy una persona libre, and then
  because persona is going with soy, because what you are saying in fact is, I am a person, soy una
  persona, then you know you are safe. Also, different Spanish dialects can have different ideas
  about what should go with ser and what should go with estar. So for example, casado, which
  means married, not cansado, casado, comes from casa, which literally means housed. When you
  are married you are housed. Casado, in some places they use with ser and in some places they use
  with estar. They can't agree on whether being married is a characteristic or a state. If you want to
  avoid this insecurity about it you can say, soy una persona casada, and then you know that
  persona is going with soy, so whatever then describes persona is not important. Persona goes
  with soy. When you say I am a person, then that is characteristic. Let's explore this idea a little
  more. Busy in Spanish is occupied, ocupado. Ocupado.
Student: Ocupado.
Teacher: Good. How do you say, I am busy?
Student: Estoy ocupada.
Teacher: Estoy ocupada. Or I would say, estoy ocupado. Now, if I want to say, I am a busy person, then
  with this adjective, actually, I can't switch to soy, and say soy ocupado. That's bad Spanish. But
  you as a Spanish learner, how are you supposed to know that? So, you can use persona as a safety
   net, in the sense of I am a busy person, and then you're sure it's perfect Spanish. So how would
   you say I am a busy person?
Student: Soy una persona ocupada.
Teacher: Good. Soy una persona ocupada. So that's a characteristic, because what you are actually saying
   is, I am a person, and much more characteristic than that you can't get. So, estoy ocupado, as a
   state, and then soy una persona ocupada, characteristic, males or females would say persona
   ocupada. Ocupada refers to persona, not to the speaker, so I would also say, soy una persona
   ocupada. How would you say, we are busy?
Student: Estamos ocupados.
Teacher: Estamos ocupados. But if you wanted to say, we are busy people:
Student: Somos personas ocupadas.
Teacher: Good. Somos personas ocupadas. To be worried is to be preoccupied. So how do you think that
   would sound?
Student: Preocupado.
Teacher: Preocupado. I am worried:
Student: Estoy preocupada.
Teacher: Good. He is worried:
Student: Está preocupado.
Teacher: Good. He is a worried person. He is worried as a characteristic. He is worryful:
Student: Es una persona preocupada.
Teacher: Good. Es una persona preocupada.
 Spanish Track 33
Teacher: So some adjectives will exclusively go with estar. Some adjectives will exclusively go with ser.
   Some adjectives can go with either ser or estar, and change their meaning, like aburrido, meaning
   bored as a state, or boring as a characteristic, just changing depending on whether it goes with ser
   or estar. Another example of a word like this is listo. Listo.
Student: Listo.
Teacher: Now listo, when it comes with estar, means ready. So how would you say I am ready?
Student: Estoy listo, or lista, in my case.
Teacher: Estoy lista, or listo. How would you say, we are ready?
Student: Estamos listos.
Teacher: Good. And what if we were a female group?
Student: Estamos listas.
Teacher: Estamos listas. And what if we wanted to emphasize We are ready:
Student: Somos, no,
Teacher: You make it a characteristic and it's more emphatic...
Student: Nosotros-
Teacher: It's a very interesting idea.
Student: It's what you said when I go too fast. So it's nosotros estamos listas.
Teacher: There's a contradiction there.
Student: Nosotras estamos listas.
Teacher: Yes. All-female group: nosotras estamos listas, or male or mixed group: nosotros estamos listos.
   So, to be listo, to be ready as a characteristic, means to be smart in Spanish. So this is one of the
   words that we can use with ser or estar and the meaning changes. So, estoy listo: I am ready. Soy
   listo: I am smart. So if you want to say, he is smart, he is smart, how would you say it?
Student: Es listo.
Teacher: Es listo. She is smart:
Student: Es lista.
Teacher: Good. You are smart, speaking informally, to a woman? If you forgot the you are you can think of
   where are you from? That might help you trigger it. De dónde-
Student: Eres. Eres lista.
Teacher: Good. You are very smart:
Student: Eres muy lista.
Teacher: Good. The word for so, like I am so bored or I am so tired, is tan. T-a-n. Tan.
Student: Tan.
Teacher: So how would you say, I am so tired?
Student: Estoy tan cansado. Cansada.
Teacher: Good. Estoy tan cansado. Estoy tan cansada. Good. How would you say, I am so bored?
Student: Estoy tan aburrida.
Teacher: Good. Estoy tan aburrido, aburrida. How would you say, he is so bored?
Student: Él está tan aburrido.
Teacher: Good. Está tan aburrido, or Él está tan aburrido. Now how would you say, it is so boring, it is
   so boring. So boring, not bored. Boring.
Student: Es tan aburrido.
Teacher: Good. Es tan aburrido. The word for good in Spanish is bueno. We've mentioned this before. We
   have in English Bon Appetit which is of course French, but we say it in English, and you can see
   the o of bon appetit splitting to become bueno in Spanish. Now the meaning of bueno changes as
   well between ser and estar. If you are talking about it is, the change is a kind of change in feeling.
   Es bueno, está bueno: a small change in feeling which really depends on dialect so we won't look
  at it too much here, we'll just listen. But if you refer to people, in most dialects, if we use ser, we
  get the meaning of “to be a good person” or “to be good at something”. So if you want to say, they
  are good, and you mean “they are good people”, or that they are good at something, how would
  you say it?
Student: Son buenos.
Teacher: Son buenos. He is good:
Student: Es bueno.
Teacher: Es bueno. Now if you use estar, it will sound like he is attractive. He is in good form. So bueno
  with estar, if we are talking about people, then gives you this meaning. So how would you say
  that? He is good, meaning attractive, in good form:
Student: Está bueno.
Teacher: Está bueno. So, you see that you can have many different changes in shade of meaning between
  ser and estar. So other than the fact that we are being permitted and obliged to perceive and express
  the world in a certain way by Spanish, which is very interesting in itself, we also get the opportunity
  to use these different nuances between ser and estar and when you really get your head around it,
  which is just through listening and observing and seeing how people are using it, you will probably
  feel that it's missing in English. That sometimes in English you might want to clarify, not estar
  but es, and you can't do it. So you realize that Spanish gives you a tool to relate to reality that in
  this case, English doesn't give you. And this is one of the most fascinating and exciting things
  about language learning. Not an obstacle to speaking the language, we don't want to see it like this,
  oh every time I use to be I have to think about this “characteristic or state” business. No, we want
  to look at it from the other angle, about what it offers us. How would you say, I want to know how
  he is, and we mean, I want to know, how is he doing?
Student: Quiero saber cómo es.
Teacher: How is he doing:
Student: Oh. Cómo está.
Teacher: Good. Quiero saber cómo está. Now what would it mean, quiero saber cómo es? What would
   that mean?
Student: How he is. What he's like.
Teacher: Exactly. I want to know what he's like. Good. Another adjective you can use with ser or estar is
   feliz. What do you think feliz might mean?
Student: Happy.
Teacher: And how do you know that?
Student: Feliz navidad.
Teacher: Oh okay! Happy Christmas. Feliz navidad. But is there some connection in English that might
   have helped you as well? Did you hear felicity in English?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: How would felicity be in Spanish?
Student: Felicidad.
Teacher: Felicidad. Which means happiness. Happiness. So feliz, happy. So feliz can also go with ser or
   estar to give the meaning of I am happy or I am a happy person. So we don't need to say I am a
   happy person, we can just use ser. So like I said there's no real way for you to know that other
   than listening. If you wanted to play safe, and say, literally, I am a happy person, it would not be
   at all incorrect. So, firstly, how do you say, I am happy, as a state?
Student: Estoy feliz.
Teacher: Estoy feliz. Now, I am happy, and you mean as a characteristic:
Student: Soy feliz.
Teacher: Soy feliz. So this is fine. You can do this, but there is no real way for you to know whether feliz is
   an adjective that is flexible enough to be used with ser and estar. It really depends on the adjective
   itself, the word itself, rather than the meaning in many cases. So, with that insecurity, and wanting
   to give the meaning, you could have just said, I am a happy person, and then you don't have to
   worry about it. So how would you say that?
Student: Soy una persona feliz.
Teacher: Good. Soy una persona feliz. And that's also perfect Spanish. So there you could have said soy
  feliz or soy una persona feliz. So to really get our heads around ser and estar it's important to
  listen actively, and to notice and see how people are using ser and estar, and making our own
  conclusions as to why, working with this base of state and characteristic. It's a process of listening,
  and the more you get intimate with this idea, it offers you a great range of expression that you don't
  have in English and you should really enjoy it.
Spanish Track 34
Teacher: To speak. Do you remember how to say to speak? It begins with the silent h.
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. Good. What is I speak or I am speaking?
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: Hablo. Good. And what was to sleep, or to be dormant let’s say?
Student: Dormir.
Teacher: Dormir. And how do you say I sleep?
Student: Duermo.
Teacher: Good. We said also that you can get the additional meaning of I fall asleep by saying I sleep myself:
Student: Me duermo.
Teacher: Me duermo. Good. To eat was:
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. Good. So I eat or I am eating is:
Student: Como.
Teacher: Como. So here the o doesn’t split. Good. To have breakfast, to have breakfast, we don’t say in
   Spanish to have breakfast. We have a verb to breakfast, let’s say, and the verb to breakfast is
   desayunar, desayunar.
Student: Desayunar.
Teacher: Breakfast and desayunar are direct translations of each other in fact. I don’t know if you noticed
   that in English breakfast is “break fast”. When we have breakfast we break the fast. And in Spanish
   “des” is like un, ayunar is to fast. So to “un-fast”. So desayunar is like to “un-fast”, to “break
   fast”. Desayunar.
Student: Desayunar.
Teacher: To have breakfast. I'm having breakfast or I have breakfast:
Student: Desayuno.
Teacher: Desayuno. And desayuno is also the noun. El desayuno is the breakfast. What was to wait or to
   hope? Desperate is related because again we have this “des” like in desayunar which is like “un-
   hoped” or “un-hopeful” is to be desperate. So to wait or to hope:
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: Good. Esperar. Good. What is I wait or I am waiting or I hope or I am hoping?
Student: Espero.
Teacher: Espero. So we’ve been giving the verbs two translations in the present tense. I speak or I am
   speaking, I go or I am going, I wait or I am waiting. This is because this –ing tense in English we
   really overuse it. For example we use this –ing in English to refer to the future: He is doing it
   tomorrow, whereas in Spanish we just use the present tense with that future context. Lo hace
   mañana. Which is why we need to give both translations for hace, for example. He makes or does
   or he is making or doing. And we translate hablo as I speak and I am speaking. But this doesn’t
   mean that I am speaking doesn’t exist. It does exist but we use it in Spanish only when we want to
   show what we are doing right now in this moment. So, beginning this structure I am speaking, this
   I am: do you think that you would choose ser for characteristics, or do you think that you would
   choose estar for states?
Student: It’s a state so estoy.
Teacher: Good. We will use estar because of course what we are doing is a state. So we will always use
   estar with these structures. So the first part of this sentence is estoy. Now to get speaking, –ing,
   from to speak we take off –r and we add –ando, -ando. And we get hablando.
Student: Hablando.
Teacher: So, I’m speaking:
Student: Estoy hablando.
Teacher: Estoy hablando. Good. So maybe somebody interrupts you and you won’t say hablo, you will
  say estoy hablando. How would you say I am waiting and you mean right now? Right now, I am
  waiting here, I am waiting here:
Student: Estoy esperando aquí.
Teacher: Estoy esperando aquí. Good. So you could say espero aquí. Maybe it would sound a little more
  like I'll wait here rather than I am waiting here but both are fine. In many situations both are fine
  and there will be just a slight change in meaning. Espero aquí, estoy esperando aquí. What you
  can’t do is say I am eating with her tomorrow. The –ing, you need to use it just for what you are
  doing right now. So how was to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: And how would you say I speak or I am speaking?
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: Hablo. And what was to prepare? If you forgot it you can go from preparation.
Student: Preparación, Preparar.
Teacher: And I prepare or I am preparing:
Student: Preparo.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I am preparing it tomorrow?
Student: Lo preparo mañana.
Teacher: Lo preparo mañana. So if you want to show, if you want to emphasize that we are doing
  something right now, I am preparing, firstly if we divide that up into two bits: I am - preparing:
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: Estoy. Good. Preparar becomes?
Student: Preparando.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I am preparing?
Student: Estoy preparando.
Teacher: Good. Estoy preparando. Good. So that’s if you want to say I am preparing it right now, you can
   use this structure. So how would you say I am preparing it?
Student: Lo estoy preparando.
Teacher: Lo estoy preparando or Estoy preparándolo. Even though it’s a changed verb here we can have
   the lo after –ando. Estoy preparándolo or lo estoy preparando. We said that to have breakfast
   was desayunar, desayunar. So how would you say we are having breakfast and you mean right
   now?
Student: Estamos desayunando.
Teacher: -ando. Good. Estamos desayunando. So, for –ar verbs we take off the –ar and we put –ando and
   we get this tense to show what we are doing right now. And we are not going to use it as we do in
   English: I'm finding out tomorrow and I'm doing it next week, I'm preparing it later. How would
   you say I'm preparing it later?
Student: Estoy preparando-
Teacher: This is not how we use it. So in Spanish we only use it to describe what we're doing right now.
Student: Right. Sorry.
Teacher: So this is why we are giving preparo, for example, the translation of both I prepare and I am
   preparing. So that when we want to say things like I am preparing it later, we don’t go to estoy
   preparando.
Student: Lo preparo más tarde.
Teacher: Lo preparo más tarde. Good. But if you wanted to give the meaning of I am preparing it right
   now, how would you say it?
Student: Estoy preparándolo.
Teacher: Good. Estoy preparándolo or lo estoy preparando. And there you get the meaning of right now
   in this moment. Good. So for –ar verbs we are taking off the –ar and we are putting –ando to get
  this –ing. For –er, –ir verbs we take off the –er or the –ir and we put on -iendo, -iendo, i-e-n-d-o,
  to get this –ing form. So how would you get eating from to eat? How would eating be from comer?
Student: Comiendo.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I am eating, and you mean right now?
Student: Estoy comiendo.
Teacher: Estoy comiendo. Good. I am eating. And how would you say he is eating or she is eating or you
  formal?
Student: Está comiendo.
Teacher: Good. Está comiendo. So maybe somebody calls you and they say Can I speak to Pablo?, and
  you say Está comiendo, you mean right now. What was to sell? You can think of vending machine.
Student: Vender.
Teacher: Vender. Good. How would you say: They sell it, they sell it?
Student: Venden. Lo venden.
Teacher: Lo venden. Good. How would you say they are selling it tomorrow or they will sell it tomorrow?
Student: Lo venden manaña.
Teacher: Lo venden mañana. Good. Now if you want to say they are selling it right now, and you want to
  give that meaning “right now” how would it be?
Student: Están vendiéndolo.
Teacher: Good. Están vendiéndolo or lo están vendiendo. Good.
 Spanish Track 35
Teacher: So going back to ser and estar, and the difference between ser and estar, how would you say
   sincerity in Spanish? Sincerity:
Student: Is it sinceridad?
Teacher: It is. Sinceridad. So if you had to guess, what is sincere in Spanish, what would you guess?
Student: Sencero.
Teacher: Sincero.
Student: Sincero.
Teacher: Sincero. Good. So there's no rule for this, but if we have sincerity becoming sinceridad, we can
   guess that sincere will be very similar in Spanish and we can play around and try to find it. Sincero.
   Good. So do you think to be sincere is a state or a characteristic?
Student: It can be both, depending on the situation.
Teacher: Indeed, but if you look at the concept, the concept of sincere - because this is how Spanish decides
   it - the concept of sincere, is it a state or a characteristic to be sincere?
Student: Well if it's, generally it's a characteristic, but if someone, we're talking about that moment that
   someone is saying something, then in that moment, they're being, they're in that state of being
   sincere.
Teacher: You're right, and our usage, and that's what we're going to look at now, can get around that, but
   Spanish is not looking at the use. It's looking just at the concept by itself, so sincerity, is it a
   characteristic or is it a state?
Student: It's a characteristic.
Teacher: Good. So, it goes with ser. So if you want to say, I am sincere, how would you say it?
Student: Soy sincero, sincera.
Teacher: Good. Soy sincera. Good. And we are sincere:
Student: Somos sinceras, if it's women.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Or sinceros.
Teacher: Good. But, as you correctly said, you might want to say, I am being sincere now. So to give the
   meaning of I am being sincere, you will say, very literally, I am being sincere. How would you
   say that? I am being sincere:
Student: Estoy, I forgot the word for being.
Teacher: Ser is to be, in this case because it refers to sincero, so how would you make that -ing? Vender,
   vendiendo. Ser:
Student: Estoy siendo sincero.
Teacher: Or in your case it would be?
Student: Sincera.
Teacher: Good. Estoy siendo sincera. Or estoy siendo sincero.
   Honest in Spanish is honesto. Honesto. So how would you say, we are being honest?
Student: Estamos siendo honestos.
Teacher: Good. Estamos siendo honestos. So to be honest, as an idea, is characteristic. But this doesn't
   restrict us in Spanish of course, if you want to say we are being honest, we can do that in exactly
   the same way as we do in English. We are: estamos, being: siendo, our characteristic to be:
   honestos. Estamos siendo honestos. Good! Salir is to go out or to leave. Salir. To go out or to
   leave, and it's irregular in that the I version is not “salo” but, you remember how it was?
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. Good. Salgo. I leave or I go out. Good. Soon, soon in Spanish is pronto. So you can say, I
   am leaving soon. Is soon right now?
Student: No.
Teacher: No. So how would you say, I am leaving soon?
Student: Salgo pronto.
Teacher: Good. Salgo pronto. And how would you say, I am leaving tomorrow?
Student: Salgo mañana.
Teacher: Good. Salgo mañana. But if you want to say, I am leaving right now, and you mean this moment?
Student: Estoy saliendo.
Teacher: Estoy saliendo. So we need to resist the temptation of the negative language transfer from English
   which will make us want to put -ing in many places where we don't put it in Spanish, which is why
   we are giving usually in the present tense both translations: I wait, I am waiting; I sell, I am selling.
   To buy was comprar.
Student: Comprar.
Teacher: I buy them, or I'm buying them. How would that be?
Student: Los compro.
Teacher: Los compro. Good. I am buying them tomorrow:
Student: Los compro mañana.
Teacher: Good. I am buying them next week. Next week is the week that comes. La semana is the week.
   What is to come?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say the week that comes? La semana que:
Student: Viene.
Teacher: So I'm buying them next week, I'm buying them the week that comes:
Student: Los compro la semana que viene.
Teacher: Good. Los compro la semana que viene. So again, here we would use -ing in English, I am buying
   them next week, but we want to resist that temptation in Spanish. Los compro la semana que
  viene. If you wanted to say right now: so maybe you get a phone call and somebody asks you,
  have you bought them yet? And you say, I am buying them now, how would you say that?
Student: Estoy comprándolos ahora.
Teacher: Good, good. I am buying them now. Los estoy comprando ahora, estoy comprándolos ahora.
 Spanish Track 36
Teacher: So we saw that we can use the present tense to refer to the future. For example, if we have some
   future context we can just use the present tense by itself. So we could say I am having breakfast
   with them tomorrow. Now in Spanish, you don’t say with them. You say with they. With they. So
   how would that be, first?
Student: Con ellos.
Teacher: Good. And to have breakfast, we said, was to “un-fast”. Desayunar, like in English breakfast,
   “break fast”. So, I’m having breakfast with them tomorrow:
Student: Desayuno con ellos mañana.
Teacher: Good. Desayuno con ellos mañana. Good. And if we don’t have a future context, like mañana
   or any other context showing us it’s the future, we can also use I am going to speak about the
   future. So you can say I am going to have breakfast with them. How is that?
Student: Voy a desayunar con ellos.
Teacher: Good. Voy a desayunar con ellos. Good. And if we have the future context, it doesn’t mean we
   have to say desayuno con ellos mañana. We could also say voy a desayunar con ellos mañana.
   The fact that we have future context doesn’t mean we can’t use voy anymore. So we’ve seen in
   that way we can use the present to talk about the future, but this doesn’t mean that we don’t have
   a future tense in Spanish. We do. Luckily, we don’t have to learn any new sounds to master the
   future tense in Spanish. The future tense in Spanish is connected with the past tense that we learned
   of haber. Haber. This past of I have had breakfast or I have eaten, I have gone. So let’s make a
   recap of the forms of haber. Now it’s very irregular, haber, and we said that a nice trick to
   remember the different forms of haber is just looking at the two vowel sounds inside the verb
   haber. So what are those two vowel sounds?
Student: /a/ and /e/.
Teacher: Good. Let’s start with /e/. What does he mean by itself?
Student: I have.
Teacher: Good. I have spelled h-e. And what other person is connected with I? What’s the plural of I, let’s
   say?
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Good. We. So we have he for I have and hemos for we have. What is ha by itself? H-a:
Student: He, she, it, or you (formal).
Teacher: Good. So give me the other two versions now.
Student: Han.
Teacher: Good. They or you guys.
Student: And has, which is you (informal).
Teacher: Good. So that's our set. Let’s practice a little bit some structures with haber just to recap. So what
   was to sleep? Dormant:
Student: Dormir.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I have slept? Begin with I have:
Student: He dormido.
Teacher: Good. We have slept:
Student: Hemos dormido.
Teacher: He has slept:
Student: Ha dormido.
Teacher: Good. How would you say to recommend?
Student: Recomendación. Recomendar.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say They have recommended it, they have recommended it, and I remind
   you that with these structures with haber, the it has to come before haber. There’s no option of
   where to put it. So They have recommended it:
Student: Lo han recomendado.
Teacher: Lo han recomendado. Good. So these forms that we have, these forms of haber that we have –
   he, hemos, ha, has, han – are also the endings that we have for the future tense. So like I said,
   we will learn the future tense now without having to learn any new sounds. Now, the interesting
   thing about the future tense is that we take the verb in its “to” form, where it’s an –ar verb, -er
   verb, or –ir verb, doesn’t matter, and we put the ending at the end of the “to” form. And we
   stress the ending. We are effectively pushing the accent into the future. For example, we have
   comer, and what was I have from haber?
Student: He.
Teacher: He. So that’s the sound, without the h, just the sound /e/. That’s the sound that we need for future
   for I. We add that on to comer and we get comeré, and that’s I will eat. Now we are pushing the
   accent into the future, which might just seem like a coincidence. But you can notice that it happens
   in other languages as well, this phenomenon. For example, in Greek part of the past tense is to pull
   the accent back one syllable, to pull the accent back into the past. And actually, this is so important
   in Greek that if there is not a syllable there to do it, you add one to pull the accent back into the
   past. So this is a phenomenon that you see in different languages. The accents representing
   somehow or reflecting somehow the concept of time and tenses. So here we have pushing the
   accent into the future: comeré. I will eat. You can give me the rest of the versions for the future of
   comer.
Student: Comeremos.
Teacher: Good. Comeremos: We will eat.
Student: Comerá.
Teacher: Good. He will eat.
Student: Comerás.
Teacher: You (informal) will eat.
Student: Comerán.
Teacher: Good. They or you guys will eat. Good. What was to go? We said it was very irregular. We have
   voy and vamos and va, but the verb to go doesn’t look anything like them.
Student: Ir.
Teacher: Ir. Ir in the future is regular. So we can follow these rules and get the future tenses of to go: I will
   go, he will go. So what is I will go?
Student: Iré.
Teacher: Iré. And we will go:
Student: Iremos.
Teacher: Iremos. He will go:
Student: Irá.
Teacher: Irá. They or you guys:
Student: Irán.
Teacher: Irán. Like the country. They will go to Iran:
Student: Irán a Irán.
Teacher: Irán a Irán. Good. You (informal) will go:
Student: Irás.
Teacher: Good. And what if we wanted to make it a question? Will you go?:
Student: ¿Irás?
Teacher: Good. Won’t you go?:
Student: ¿No irás?
Teacher: Why won’t you go?:
Student: ¿Por qué no irás?
Teacher: Good. What was to find or to encounter?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. I will find:
Student: Encontraré.
Teacher: Good. Encontraré. I will find it:
Student: Lo encontraré.
Teacher: Good. Lo encontraré. We will find it:
Student: Los encontraré.
Teacher: That was an interesting error, because I said we, so I made I plural with we, and your mind made
   the it plural, ah?
Student: Yeah.
Teacher: We will find it:
Student: Lo encontraremos.
Teacher: Good. Lo encontraremos. He or she or you (formal) will find it:
Student: Lo encontrará.
Teacher: Good. Lo encontrará. He will find them, or she will find them, or you (formal) will find them:
Student: Los encontrarán.
Teacher: So you made both of them them or they.
Student: You said them.
Teacher: But we said He will find them or she will find them.
Student: Oh sorry! Los encontrará.
Teacher: Good. Los encontrará. So we want to think about the two things separately, ah? Who is doing the
   verb and who are they doing it to. Who or what are they doing it to. We said that quedar means
   to remain, quedar, and to get the meaning of I stay we say I remain myself. How was that? I
   remain myself:
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: Me quedo. Good. How would you say I will stay, then? I will remain myself.
Student: Quedaré.
Teacher: Good, but quedaré means I will remain and if you want the meaning of stay, you must, must use-
   Student: Me.
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: Me quedaré.
Teacher: Me quedaré. I will remain myself or I will stay. I will stay here:
Student: Me quedaré aquí.
Teacher: Good. What was to prepare?
Student: Preparar.
Teacher: Good. And I will prepare:
Student: Prepararé.
Teacher: Good. So it’s very important to think out the whole verb, preparar, and then add on the -e,
   prepararé. Because a very common mistake that learners make is to say preparé. And they miss
   out the last ar because they don’t think out the whole verb first. So we must think out the whole
   verb first, preparar, and then add on the ending, prepararé. What was to wait or to hope?
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: Esperar. I will wait:
Student: Esperaré.
Teacher: Good. What was to organize?
Student: Organizar.
Teacher: Good. He will organize:
Student: Organizará.
Teacher: Good. Organizará. So the useful thing about the accent being on this ending is that we don’t have
   to worry about where the accent goes when we’re pronouncing the whole verb, organizará.
   On the end. Organizará. They will organize:
Student: Organizarán.
Teacher: Good. Organizarán. Good. What was tired?
Student: Cansado.
Teacher: Good. Cansado. So how would you say I will be tired? I will be tired:
Student: Seré? Ah. Estaré cansada.
Teacher: Good. Estaré cansada. Good. How would it will be be, from ser? It will be, using ser:
Student: Será.
Teacher: Good. Sound familiar from anywhere?
Student: Que será, será.
Teacher: Yes. So very simple, the future tense. Doesn’t matter if we have –ar, -er, or –ir verb. We are adding
   on these endings and these endings are the same as the different versions of haber. So if we forget
   them we can look back to haber and then we just add that on the end. But, in saying that, the future
   tense is not so often used in Spanish. Most of the time you will find yourself using present or voy
   a, vamos a. But the future tense does exist and now you know it.
 Spanish Track 37
Teacher: What was the verb to give, do you remember the verb to give?
Student: Dar.
Teacher: Dar. Good. So how would you say I will give?
Student: Daré.
Teacher: Good. And we will give:
Student: Daremos.
Teacher: Good. And he will give or she, you (formal), it:
Student: Dará.
Teacher: Good. They, you guys:
Student: Darán.
Teacher: And you (informal):
Student: Darás.
Teacher: Good. How would you say Will you guys give it to me? Now, me – me – can also mean to me, so
   we don’t need that to. And out of these little words, me, and what is the word for it?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. So out of these little words, me and lo, the personal one, the one referring to the person, comes
   first. Will you guys give it to me?:
Student: ¿Me lo darán?
Teacher: Good. ¿Me lo darán? What if this it was a feminine thing?
Student: ¿Me la darán?
Teacher: Good. ¿Me la darán? And I should clarify, this isn’t a way of requesting, like in English, Will you
   guys give it to me?, like Can you guys give it to me? This is more of a literal question, Are you
   guys going to give it to me? Will you guys give it to me? If you want to get this meaning of will
   you like can you, you will just use can you in Spanish. The word for something is algo. A-l-g-o.
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say They will give you something, and we mean informal you? Remember
   the thought process. The thought process must be, first, “Who is doing the verb? Who is doing the
   verb?” They will give. That’s the first place:
Student: Darán.
Teacher: You something:
Student: Te darán algo.
Teacher: Te darán algo. Good. How would you say They will give it to you, still speaking informally?
   They will give it to you:
Student: Te lo darán.
Teacher: Good. Te lo darán. They will give it to you. Good. How would you say They will give it to us, they
   will give it to us:
Student: So it’s Nos lo darán.
Teacher: Good. Nos lo darán. They will not give it to us:
Student: No nos lo darán.
Teacher: Good. No nos lo darán. So we saw that me, te, nos can mean me or to me, you or to you, us or to
   us, or even in some other circumstances for me or for us, for you. Me, te, nos can also mean myself,
   yourself, and ourselves. For example, you can say I give myself and you will just use me. So how
   would you say I give myself?
Student: Me doy?
Teacher: Me doy. If you want to say I realize in Spanish, you say me doy cuenta. Cuenta is something like
   account, to give yourself account of, to take account of. That’s how you say I realize in Spanish.
   If you say realizar it means to realize like a project, to bring into fruition, no? So you say I give
   myself account, cuenta. So how would you say that?
Student: Me doy cuenta.
Teacher: Me doy cuenta. This means I realize. You realize, talking informally?
Student: Te das cuenta.
Teacher: Good. Te das cuenta. How would you make that a question?
Student: ¿Te das cuenta?
Teacher: Good. ¿Te das cuenta? This is used a lot conversationally. ¿Te das cuenta? Do you realize? Do
   you know what I mean? Do you know what I’m saying? Good. We realize, we realize, we give
   ourselves account:
Student: Nos damos cuenta.
Teacher: Good. Nos damos cuenta. So me can mean to me, for me, from me. It can mean myself. Te can
   mean you or to you, from you, yourself. And nos: us, to us, or ourselves or each other. We said
   that you might hear nos vemos – we see each other – as a way to say ciao, goodbye. Nos vemos.
   We see each other later. See you later. Now, you get all of these different meanings with me, te,
   and nos, but the ones beginning with l, so lo, la, los, las, they do change to get these different
   meanings. So when we say to him or to her or to you (formal) or to them we go from lo and la and
   los and las to le and les. So lo and la become le, and los and las become les. For example, lo doy
   means I give it. Now, if I want to say I give him, what I actually mean is I give to him, in which
   case here we must change to le. If I say I give her, I don’t mean I’m going to pick her up and give
   her to somebody. I probably mean I give to her. In which case we’re not going to use la, we’re
   going to use le. So let’s practice this a little bit. So we said dar is to give. Now, if you say I give
   it, how do you say that?
Student: Lo doy.
Teacher: Lo doy. And I give them and you still are talking about the things you are giving?
Student: Los doy.
Teacher: Los doy. But now if you want to say I give them and you mean to them. So remember you might
   not even say this to in English. But what you mean is I give to them, then this los is going to change.
Student: Les doy.
Teacher: Les doy. Good. The word for something was?
Student: Algo.
Teacher: Algo. So let’s say I’m giving them something:
Student: Les doy algo.
Teacher: Les doy algo. Good. So this is to them. To speak, to speak, began with a silent h. I don’t know if
   you remember this verb.
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. Good. So how do you say I speak?
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: Hablo. How would you say I have spoken? I have:
Student: He.
Teacher: Yes. He. So I have spoken:
Student: He, is it hablando?
Teacher: No. This is speaking and spoken is very similar.
Student: He hablado.
Teacher: He hablado. Good. I have spoken to him:
Student: Le he hablado.
Teacher: Good. Le he hablado. I have spoken to him or to her. Could be either. Now what if you wanted to
   say We have spoken to him?
Student: Le hemos hablado.
Teacher: Good. Le hemos hablado. So this le, it could be the lo to le, or the la to le. So many meanings are
   included here. It could be We have spoken to him, We have spoken to her, We have spoken to you
   (formal), speaking to male or female. Le hemos hablado. How was he has? Or she has or it has,
   from haber?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Ha. Good. H-a. Ha. He has spoken:
Student: Ha hablado.
Teacher: Good. They have spoken:
Student: Han hablado.
Teacher: Han hablado. They have spoken about it, they have spoken it:
Student: Lo han hablado.
Teacher: Good. They have spoken to him or to her:
Student: Le han hablado.
Teacher: Good. Le han hablado. They have spoken to them. I mean one them spoken to a different them.
   They have spoken to them:
Student: Les han hablado.
Teacher: Very good. Les han hablado. Good. So we had ver, to see. The version for I see was a little bit
   irregular, how was it?
Student: Veo.
Teacher: Veo. Good. A little bit irregular, not “vo” as it should be, v-o, it’s veo, v-e-o. Good. So if you want
   to say I see it or I see him or I see you, talking formally:
Student: Lo veo.
Teacher: Lo veo. What if you saw a feminine thing or if you saw her or if you saw you (formal), talking to
   a female?
Student: La veo.
Teacher: La veo. What if you were seeing las casas, what if you meant I see them, and you’re referring to
   feminine things?
Student: Las veo.
Teacher: Las veo. And what else could it mean, then? Other than I see them, talking about things?
Student: I see them, meaning women.
Teacher: Or? What else?
Student: You, females.
Teacher: Yeah. I see them, females, I see you guys, females, or I see them, feminine objects. Good. We said
   that the kitchen is la cocina and to make the verb you can just stick an r on cocina and you get?
Student: Cocinar.
Teacher: Cocinar, with the accent on the end. Cocinar. Now in English if I say He’s cooking me something,
   I can say He’s cooking me something or He’s cooking something for me. Both are acceptable in
   English. So we’re not looking for the direct translation, we’re looking for the feeling more than
   anything. We want to identify the feeling of “is it to me, is it for me, or is it directly me?” Is he
   cooking me? So it’s the feeling that we want to get our heads around more than the direct
   translation of whether we’re using to or not in English. For example, I listen to him. Here we’re
   using to in English, with listen. But we don’t use it with hear. I hear him. I listen to him. So we’re
   not looking for direct translation of when we’re using to and for or not. What we’re trying to do is
   generally perceive, ok, am I being cooked? Am I being spoken? Am I coming out of somebody’s
   mouth? Ah? Or is it indirect, am I being cooked for? Am I being given to? So, like I said, with me,
   te and nos it doesn’t matter anyway, because they won’t change. So if I want to say He’s cooking
   me, and I mean he’s directly cooking me in the oven, or if I mean he’s cooking something for me,
   then the sentence isn’t going to change anyway in Spanish. So how would you say that? He is
   cooking me something, he is cooking me something:
Student: Me cocina algo.
Teacher: Good. Me cocina algo. Now let’s say He’s cooking something for us:
Student: Nos cocina algo.
Teacher: Good. Nos cocina algo. He’s cooking something for you, speaking informally:
Student: Te cocina algo.
Teacher: Good. So me, te, nos we don’t have to worry about them. They don’t change. But if I want to say
   He is cooking him something, how would I say it?
Student: Le cocina algo.
Teacher: Very good. How would you say He is cooking them something?
Student: Les cocina algo.
Teacher: Good. Les cocina algo. What if you wanted to say He is cooking them and with this them you are
   referring to the things he is cooking? Not to the people he is cooking for.
Student: Los cocina algo.
Teacher: Eh, we don’t need the algo anymore.
Student: Los cocina.
Teacher: Los cocina. And if he was cooking feminine things, like las tartas, the tarts, for example, how
   would it be? He’s cooking them:
Student: Las cocina.
Teacher: Good. Now if you wanted to say He’s cooking them for us and we still mean feminine things, let's
   stay with las tartas. He’s cooking them for us, how would it be?
Student: Nos las cocina.
Teacher: Perfect. We don’t need for or any of this and we put the personal one first. Nos las cocina. Good.
   Again, what was to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Good. I speak:
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: Good. I speak to him:
Student: Le hablo.
Teacher: Le hablo. Good. And I’m speaking to them:
Student: Les hablo.
Teacher: Good. They are speaking to them:
Student: Les hablan.
Teacher: Good.
Spanish Track 38
Teacher: So, we said that lo and la and los and las, become le and les. The four become two. The four
   options of lo, la, los, las become le and les when it’s to him, to her, for him, for her. And we said
   that me, te, and nos, they don’t change to get these different meanings. They stay as they are. And
   we also saw that these words, me, te, and nos could mean myself, yourself, ourselves or each other.
   So how would you say I speak to myself?
Student: Me hablo.
Teacher: Me hablo. We speak to ourselves:
Student: Nos hablamos.
Teacher: Nos hablamos. Although, of course, the more natural meaning you would probably understand
   from nos hablamos is we speak to each other, as nos also means each other. Now to get the
   meaning of himself, herself, themselves, lo and la and los and las become se. Which is very easy
   to remember because it’s the beginning of self. So when we want this meaning of self or selves,
   we get se. So, to recap: me, te, and nos, they already have the meanings included of myself,
   yourself, ourselves, each other, but these ones that change, the small words that change, lo, la, los
   and las, to get the meaning of himself, herself, themselves is going to be se. So let’s practice it. He
   speaks to himself. How would you say that?
Student: Se habla.
Teacher: Se habla. You could say the word for he. What is the word for he?
Student: Él. Él se habla.
Teacher: Él se habla. She speaks to herself, and clarify. Use the word for she.
Student: Ella. Ella se habla.
Teacher: Ella se habla. Good. They speak to themselves:
Student: Se hablan.
Teacher: Se hablan. Se habla. Se hablan. Se. There’s no change. I speak to myself:
Student: Me hablo.
Teacher: Me hablo. Good. So here we are not using se. For me, te and nos we have all of the meanings
   included in me, te, and nos. Good. Tell me again how is they speak:
Student: Hablan.
Teacher: Good, but the accent was-
Student: HA-blan.
Teacher: Hablan. They speak to them. Now a different them. Not themselves. Ah, they speak to them. This
   group is speaking to another group.
Student: Les hablan.
Teacher: So now we can go back to a verb like to stay, to remain was quedar. So to get the meaning of stay,
   you say I remain myself. So how was that?
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: Good. Me quedo. We remain ourselves or we stay:
Student: Nos quedemos.
Teacher: -ar verb.
Student: Nos quedamos.
Teacher: Nos quedamos. Good. And you stay, talking informally. You remain yourself:
Student: Te quedas.
Teacher: Te quedas. Are you staying?:
Student: ¿Te quedas?
Teacher: Aren’t you staying?:
Student: ¿No te quedas?
Teacher: Why don’t you stay?:
Student: ¿Por qué no te quedas?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no te quedas? Good. Let’s just practice the words for emphasis as well. So you
   could say I am staying. What is the word for I:
Student: Yo.
Teacher: Yo. I’m staying. I’m remaining myself:
Student: Yo me quedo.
Teacher: Yo me quedo. Good. What was the word for we? Not us, but we?
Student: Nosotros.
Teacher: Nosotros. So we have nosotros for we. How would you say we are staying? We are remaining
   ourselves:
Student: Nosotros nos quedamos.
Teacher: Good. Nosotros nos quedamos. And if you are an all female group, nosotros will change.
Student: Nosotras.
Teacher: Good. Nosotras nos quedamos if you are an all female group. What is the word for you in the
   sense of if we want to clarify or emphasize you are staying, speaking informally. Not te, but:
Student: Tú.
Teacher: Tú. Good. So how would you say you are staying - emphasizing that we mean you?
Student: Tú te quedas.
Teacher: Tú te quedas. Good. So these are the versions actually we were practicing before with me, te, and
   nos. We didn’t look at he stays, because actually what we needed to say he stays is he remains
   himself and we didn’t have that yet. But now we do.
Student: Se - it’s queda.
Teacher: Good. That’s it. Se queda. He stays. She stays. You stay. They stay, or they remain themselves:
Student: Se quedan.
Teacher: Se quedan. Good. Querer was to want. Querer. What was I want?
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: Quiero. The /e/ of querer splits when we put the stress on it. Quiero. Now if you want to say I
  want to stay, you say, I want to remain myself. So how is that?
Student: Quiero quedarme.
Teacher: Good. Quiero quedarme. He wants to remain himself or she wants to remain herself, he wants to
  stay, she wants to stay:
Student: Quiere quedarse.
Teacher: Good. Quiere quedarse. She wants to stay. Ella quiere quedarse. He wants to stay. Él quiere
  quedarse. You (formal) want to stay. Usted quiere quedarse. What if you wanted to say they
  want to stay or you guys want to stay?
Student: Quieren quedarse.
Teacher: Quieren quedarse. So this could mean they want to stay or you guys want to stay. How would you
  clarify? Let’s clarify they want to stay:
Student: Ellos quieren quedarse.
Teacher: Good. And what if it was a female group?
Student: Ellas quieren quedarse.
Teacher: Ellas quieren quedarse. Good. And you guys:
Student: Ustedes quieren quedarse.
Teacher: Good. Ustedes quieren quedarse. And we said that while usted is formal, ustedes, the plural you,
  is not necessarily formal. Quedarse is the version of the verb that you are going to find in the
  dictionary. So in the dictionary you will find quedar and all of the different meanings of quedar
  which is remain and the various other meanings, actually, this verb has, could be used like to fit.
  Me queda bien. It fits me well. It suits me well. And then you will find the next entry: quedarse.
  And then you will find next to it to stay. So when this reflexive, when this “doing it to oneself”
  carries a different meaning, it will get a different entry in the dictionary. And it’s not going to be
   in the dictionary as quedarme, or quedarte, or quedarnos, but quedarse because this se is also
   like oneself. No? If it’s himself, herself, itself; it’s also like oneself. So in the dictionary what you
   find is to remain oneself. Quedarse. The se is written like one word. Whenever we put se, lo, me,
   te, nos, one of these small words at the end of the “to” form, it’s written like one word. You write
   it all together. Let’s practice this just with one more verb. We said that to get the sense of realize,
   I realize. In Spanish you say to give yourself account. Which is a little bit like to take acount of in
   English. Now you need to look at darse cuenta to know how to manipulate it to get the different
   versions of it that you might want. So let’s begin with I realize. I realize. I give myself account.
Student: Me doy- me doy cuenta.
Teacher: That’s it. Me doy cuenta. I don’t realize:
Student: No me doy cuenta.
Teacher: No me doy cuenta. Good. We realize, or we give ourselves account:
Student: Nos damos cuenta.
Teacher: Good. Nos damos cuenta. Perfect. We don’t realize:
Student: No nos damos cuenta.
Teacher: Good. No nos damos cuenta. Now we can make the other versions with he, she, it and you formal
   and they and you guys because we have se. So now we can do this. So how would you say he
   realizes or she realizes? Go back to dar.
Student: Da- se da cuenta.
Teacher: Good. Se da cuenta. What if we wanted to clarify? She - she realizes:
Student: Ella se da cuenta.
Teacher: Good. Ella se da cuenta. Good, and they realize:
Student: Se dan cuenta.
Teacher: Good. And they don’t realize:
Student: No se dan cuenta.
Teacher: No se dan cuenta. So this could be they don’t realize or you guys don’t realize. Well done.
Spanish Track 39
Teacher: What was the word for with in Spanish? And we have it in words like convenient, confirm -
Student: Oh, con.
Teacher: So con is with and we have it as like a Latin building block in many Latin/English words.
   Consequence: with sequence. Now in Spanish you don’t say with her, with him, with them, you
   actually just say with he, with she, with they. So how would you say with him or with he?
Student: Con él.
Teacher: Con él. With her:
Student: Con ella.
Teacher: Con ella. With them:
Student: Con ellos.
Teacher: Or, I mean if it was feminine:
Student: Oh, ellas.
Teacher: Yeah, con ellas. With us:
Student: Nos.
Teacher: Nos is us, but of course in Spanish we won’t say with us, we will say with we.
Student: Con nosotros.
Teacher: Yes, con nosotros. What if you were an all female group?
Student: Con nosotras.
Teacher: Con nosotras. Good. With you, speaking formally?
Student: Con usted.
Teacher: Con usted. And with you guys:
Student: Con ustedes.
Teacher: Con ustedes. The word for for is para. So how would you say for him?
Student: Para él.
Teacher: Para él. Good. So when you decided that it was para él, you put para and con in the same group.
   And they are in the same group. They’re in a group of words which are called prepositions. Now
   prepositions show some kind of movement or position; and they’re very important and interesting
   words so it’s useful for us to identify them as we did with verbs and adjectives and nouns. So we
   are going to investigate now a little more about prepositions and how they behave in Spanish. So
   for him, para él. For her:
Student: Para ella.
Teacher: Para ella. Good. For them:
Student: Para ellos.
Teacher: Or?
Student: Para ellas.
Teacher: Good. And for us:
Student: Para nosotros.
Teacher: Para nosotros. Or?
Student: Nosotras.
Teacher: Good. Para nosotras if it’s an all feminine group. Good. Like I said, we don’t say for him, but for
   he and we don’t say for her, but for she, with the exception of me and you informal, we get two
   different versions of the words for me and you. So for me is para mí. Para mí. And you informal
   becomes ti. So for you, speaking informally, is para ti. So this is just after prepositions we get this
   mí and ti. M-i and t-i. So we can find another preposition that we learned already. The word for of
   or from. So again this is a small word which is showing movement, direction or position; these are
   prepositions. So what was of or from?
Student: De.
Teacher: De. Good. So how would you say from him?
Student: De él.
Teacher: Good. De él. From her:
Student: De ella.
Teacher: De ella. From me:
Student: De mí.
Teacher: Yes. De mí, spelled m-i. From you speaking informally?
Student: De ti.
Teacher: De ti. Good. From them:
Student: De ellos.
Teacher: De ellos.
Student: Or ellas.
Teacher: Or ellas. Good. De ellas. From us:
Student: De nosotros.
Teacher: De nosotros. Good. From you guys:
Student: De ustedes.
Teacher: Good. Is it- Is it from you guys?:
Student: ¿Es de ustedes?
Teacher: Good. Is it from you guys? ¿Es de ustedes? How would you say it’s for you guys?
Student: Es para ustedes.
Teacher: Good. Es para ustedes. Good. How do you say it is with you guys?
Student: Es con ustedes.
Teacher: Now something to me doesn’t feel right here. When we say es de ustedes, it’s from you guys and
   es para ustedes, it’s for you guys: we are speaking about things are quite characteristic of whatever
   this thing is, whatever this it is. It’s for you guys. It’s from you guys. But, when we say it’s with
   you guys, we are speaking about a state because we are speaking about the location of something.
   So how do you think it would be - it is with you guys?
Student: Está con ustedes.
Teacher: Very good. Está con ustedes. Very good. To do or to make was hacer. H-a-c-e-r.
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Hacer. So how do you say he does or he’s doing or he makes or he’s making:
Student: Ha.
Teacher: This is from haber, but well thought out. [Laughter]
Student: So it’s hace.
Teacher: Hace. Good. A favor is un favor. Un favor. So how would you say he’s doing me a favor? He’s
   doing me a favor:
Student: Me hace un favor.
Teacher: Good. Me hace un favor. Good. How do you say he’s doing her a favor?
Student: La hace un favor.
Teacher: Now if you say la hace, it sounds like he’s making it - a feminine thing. If you want to say he’s
   doing her a favor, for her. So what does la turn to to become to her, for her?
Student: Le hace un favor.
Teacher: Good. Le hace un favor. Good. Decir is to tell. No? So we have hablar to speak or to talk and
   decir is to say or to tell. D-e-c-i-r. So /dethir/ in most of Spain. Decir. So how do you say I want
   to tell, I want to say? I want, just think of I want.
Student: Quiero.
Teacher: To say or to tell:
Student: Decir.
Teacher: Ah, all together.
Student: Quiero decir.
Teacher: Quiero decir. Ah. I want to tell him. I want to tell him:
Student: Le quiero decir.
Teacher: Le quiero decir or?
Student: Quiero decirle.
Teacher: Good. You have the option there of where you can put the le, before the changed verb or after the
   complete verb. Le quiero decir. Quiero decirle. But if you want to say, I want to say it:
Student: Lo quiero decir.
Teacher: Lo quiero decir. So we see actually with this le, we are kind of replacing a preposition with le and
   les, an imaginary preposition: to, for, from. For example, comprar. Comprar means to buy. I can
   say I buy you something. Now this you is actually replacing for you. I buy something for you. So
   what is I buy from comprar?
Student: Compro.
Teacher: Compro. How do you say I buy them and you refer to the things that you are buying?
Student: Los compro.
Teacher: Los compro. But, if you say I buy them and you mean I buy for them:
Student: Les compro.
Teacher: Les compro. So this is the most natural Spanish structure. Les compro. You use les instead of for
   them. But, you could say I buy for them. You could do that if you wanted to, using for them literally.
   So how would you say I buy or I’m buying for them?
Student: Compro para ellos.
Teacher: Compro para ellos. Good. So in an everyday situation, I’m buying something for them, les
   compro. Mostly we are going to be avoiding these prepositions, so he buys it for me. I’m just
   going to say he buys me it rather than he buys it for me. So how would you say that? He buys me
   it:
Student: Me compra. Me lo compra.
Teacher: Me lo compra. They buy me it or they buy it for me:
Student: Me lo compran.
Teacher: Good. Me lo compran. They buy them for me. They buy them for me:
Student: Me los compran.
Teacher: Good. Me los compran. Good. Now, we said that these small words me, nos, te, le, les, most of
   the time what we are replacing with them is to, but sometimes it’s like for, like to do a favor for,
   but they also might be replacing other prepositions like de. For example, if I want to say he buys
   it from me, I don’t really need the from there either. I could just say he buys me it. So how would
   I say that? He buys it from me. He buys me it:
Student: Me lo compra.
Teacher: Me lo compra. So this is totally ambiguous. No? It could mean he buys it for me or he buys it from
   me, but it’s something that we’ll understand from the context. So the key point to take away from
   here is that we probably use prepositions much more in English than in Spanish and you just want
   to kind of like listen out for this and then you will start shedding them. You will start shedding
   your prepositions the more you listen to Spanish.
 Spanish Track 40
Teacher: An interesting thing about prepositions is that they have a habit of changing between languages.
  To give you an example, in English we say I fall in love with. In Spanish, you say I enamor myself
  of. I fall in love of you. Now again, this is something that we look at with interest rather than
  looking at it as an obstacle, for the insight that it might give us about how we perceive and express
  the world through our own language. Now the fact that we use with is not necessarily casual.
  Casual in the sense of meaningless. The fact that we use with is not necessarily without its weight,
  without its meaning. If I say I fall in love with you, that preposition with necessarily involves you
  in my process of falling in love. Now this of is much more detached in feeling than with. So there
  is a school of thought which explores how these elements of language might have a real tangible
  effect on the way we interact with the world and with certain concepts and the way we express
  them and how that feeds back into the way we perceive and view the world. And I think this is a
  very nice example between falling in love with and falling in love of. So this is something to think
  about and just take interest in whenever you find that in Spanish the verb uses a different
  preposition than the one it does in English. Rather than just seeing it as a hurdle to correctness that
  you need to memorize, maybe have a little look at how it might actually be affecting, somehow or
  other, the way you perceive the world. This also helps the memory on a practical level. You are
  much more capable of internalizing and remembering this difference if rather than just mindlessly
  memorizing that you’re using de instead of con here. We are looking with a more analytical eye,
  with a curious eye, to understand what effect this might possibly have on us and in this way we
  are just going to learn the differences much easier.
  Let’s start with this verb: To fall in love is to enamor oneself. So if you look up in the dictionary
  to fall in love, what you will find is enamorarse, written as one word. Now it’s important to realize
  that it is not one word. You still have a verb there ending -ar, enamorar and then the se is just
  hooked on. So let’s start with I fall in love. How will you make enamorarse, I fall in love, I enamor
  myself?
Student: Me enamoro.
Teacher: Exactly. Me enamoro. Now if you want to say I fall in love with you, we’re probably going to
   speak informally. In Spanish we’re not going to say with you, we’re going to say of you. I enamor
   myself of you:
Student: Me enamoro de ti.
Teacher: Yeah, me enamoro de ti. Very good. I fall in love with him:
Student: Me enamoro de él.
Teacher: Good. Me enamoro de él. If we want to give the meaning of I’m falling in love right now. We can
   say I am. How is I am, from estar?
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: Good. Falling in love. Enamoring myself:
Student: Enamorándome.
Teacher: Good. It can come actually after the -ando or before estoy. Estoy enamorándome. Me estoy
   enamorando de él. Another verb that chooses a different preposition in Spanish and English is
   the verb to think. To think, we said it was related to the word pensive which means thoughtful.
Student: Pensar.
Teacher: Good. Pensar. Now you don’t say I think about you in Spanish. You say I’m thinking or I think in
   or on you. What was the word for in and on? I think we looked at it very briefly.
Student: En.
Teacher: En. Good. So we say I think in you or on you. It’s probably in, actually, because Arabic says it in
   this way and of course when languages come into contact, like the 800 years of contact that Spanish
   and Arabic had, they share a lot more than vocabulary. They also share structures. So we are
   probably saying I’m thinking in you to say I think about you, so how do you say that? I’m thinking
   about you or I think about you. Let’s keep it informal.
Student: Penso. Sorry, pienso en ti.
Teacher: Pienso en ti. Good. How would you say we think about you, or we’re thinking about you?
Student: Pensamos en ti.
Teacher: Pensamos en ti. We think about her, or we think in her, or literally we think in she:
Student: Pensamos en ella.
Teacher: Good. Pensamos en ella. To dream in Spanish is soñar.
Student: Soñar.
Teacher: This /ny/ sound like the one we have in mañana is with the ñ. Ñ is the only letter that we get in
   Spanish that we don’t get in English and it’s like an n with a little squiggly line on the top of the n
   and it’s basically n-y. So n with squiggly line on top is n-y, like in mañana. Like in soñar. Soñar.
   To dream.
Student: Soñar.
Teacher: How do think you say I dream?
Student: Soño.
Teacher: Would be “soño”, but what might happen? How is to sleep?
Student: Dormir.
Teacher: Dormir. And I sleep:
Student: Duermo.
Student: Sueño.
Teacher: Yeah, so this is happening here, but there is really no way to know if it’s going to happen or not.
   Sometimes it does, sometimes it doesn’t. If it happens for one of the versions, of course it’s going
   to happen for all of the versions that we stress the o. So, sueño, sueña, sueñan, sueñas.
   But, we dream:
Student: Soñamos.
Teacher: Soñamos, because we are not stressing it anymore. Soñamos, we are stressing the /a/. Very good.
   We don’t say I dream of in Spanish. We say I dream with. So here we use with in Spanish. I dream
   with her. The language, we said, is permitting and requiring us to perceive and express the world
   in a certain way. So when we say, you know, I dream with her, maybe you can imagine that when
   people began to talk about what they were dreaming that they had the idea of the involvement of
   the other person. You know, I’m dreaming with you. You don’t know, but it’s interesting to think
   about how that change in the preposition can really affect the way we perceive the world. And then
   subconsciously, because even though our beliefs might have modernized, like if I dream about you
   I don’t really think you’re there, and I don’t really think you are participating, but the language
   might hold an old belief that it is with you. That you are actually participating in my dream. So it’s
   interesting to think about, and thinking about it is going to help your memory internalize just this
   simple fact that the preposition changes. So how would you say I dream about her, or in Spanish,
   I dream or I’m dreaming with her?
Student: Sueño con ella.
Teacher: Sueño con ella. Good. He dreams about him:
Student: Sueña con él.
Teacher: Sueña con él. Good. What was for me?
Student: Para mí.
Teacher: Good. And for you informal?
Student: Para ti.
Teacher: Good. And what was from?
Student: De.
Teacher: De. From me:
Student: De mí.
Teacher: From you (informal):
Student: De ti.
Teacher: De ti. Good. With with, we get a little exception. With me is conmigo and it’s spelled like one
   word. So this -go is coming from nowhere and it’s all becoming one word, where de mi, para mi
  are two separate words. So we have conmigo for with me and contigo, with you, informal.
  Conmigo. C-o-n-m-i-g-o or contigo, c-o-n-t-i-g-o. So this is with me, with you. What was to come?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. To come. Good. So how would you say, speaking informally, do you want to come with
  me?:
Student: ¿Quieres venir conmigo?
Teacher: Good. Don’t you want to come with me?:
Student: ¿No quieres venir conmigo?
Teacher: ¿No quieres venir conmigo? Why don’t you want to come with me?:
Student: ¿Por qué no quieres venir conmigo?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no quieres venir conmigo? What was I have in the sense of possession?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. Good. And if we want to say I have to, we can add something to that tengo. It’s not a
  comfortable translation either, if that helps you remember it.
Student: Tengo que.
Teacher: Tengo que. Good. So how would you say you have to come with me, again speaking informally?
  You have to come with me:
Student: Tienes que venir conmigo.
Teacher: Tienes que venir conmigo. Good. Good. What was I can, from to be able?
Student: Puedo.
Teacher: Puedo. Can you come with me? (still informal):
Student: ¿Puedes venir conmigo?
Teacher: Good. ¿Puedes venir conmigo? So we have conmigo for with me, contigo for with you, speaking
   informally. So, we could say I dream about you and we’re going to say I dream with you, speaking
   informally.
Student: Sueño contigo.
Teacher: Sueño contigo. I’m going with you, informally still:
Student: I’m going. I’m forgetting the verbs.
Teacher: You’ll forget them many times and you need to find the way that you, you dig them up. That’s the
   most important thing: to take this skill away. So going, what does going relate to, if anything?
Student: Ah, voyage. Voy.
Teacher: You see, I’m going with you, speaking informally:
Student: Voy contigo.
Teacher: Very good. To depend, in Spanish, is depender. Depender. How would you say it depends?
Student: Dependa.
Teacher: Make sure before you start to change any verb, you do a quick check to see what type of verb it is.
Student: Depende.
Teacher: Yes, depender, -er verb. Depende. Good. Now in Spanish we don’t say it depends on. We say it
   depends of. So how would you say it depends on her or it depends of her?
Student: Depende de ella.
Teacher: Depende de ella. The word for yes and the word for if are the same in Spanish. So you know how
   to say yes in Spanish?
Student: Sí.
Teacher: Sí. Good. So this is also if. It depends on if she wants to go. Let’s say that. It depends:
Student: Depende.
Teacher: On or it depends of in Spanish:
Student: De.
Teacher: Good. If she wants to go:
Student: Si quiere ir.
Teacher: Good, so all together. It depends on if she wants to go:
Student: Depende de si quiere ir.
Teacher: Good. Depende de si quiere ir. It depends on if she wants to go.
 Spanish Track 41
Teacher: Let’s look again at how we speak about the future in Spanish. We saw that we have a future tense
  but we might not use it very often because, firstly, we can just use the present to talk about the
  future if we have some future context: some word like mañana, tomorrow; later, más tarde, or
  even another part of the sentence which shows us that we are talking about the future, we can just
  use the present. When we don’t have that we can use ir a, to go to, so voy a, vamos a, vas a, which
  is also present tense, voy, vas, vamos, it’s present, but we can use it to talk about the future. So,
  for example, bailar, bailar, b-a-i-l-a-r, means to dance. We can relate it to ballerina, ballerina
  actually is just dancer in Spanish, bailarín in Spanish is dancer, so that’s where we get ballerina
  from: bailar. So, if you want to say we are going to dance:
Student: Vamos a bailar.
Teacher: Vamos a bailar. Good. If you had some future context, like later, más tarde, or literally, more
  late, you could just say we dance later:
Student: Bailamos más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Bailamos más tarde. But you could have used that structure with vamos if you wanted to,
  you have the option. We can say bailamos más tarde or we could say we are going to dance later:
Student: Vamos a bailar más tarde.
Teacher: Very good. Vamos a bailar más tarde. So, we saw that we have a future tense, we have a future
  tense although we might not need to use it very often because we have this situation in Spanish
  that we can use the present, or that ir a, to go to, is used even more often than in English, this
  structure of I’m going to do it instead of I’ll do it is used even more in Spanish than in English.
  But, we do have a future tense, and the future tense is luckily very related to the different versions
  that we found of the verb haber. Haber was a very irregular verb, this to have that we use to go
  into the past. What was the trick that we used to find the different versions of this very irregular
  verb haber?
Student: We used the vowels. The /e/ and /a/ sounds.
Teacher: Good. We used these to take off from, we go: “what are the two vowels in haber? /e/ and /a/,”
   okay. He by itself means:
Student: I have.
Teacher: I have. And ha by itself means:
Student: He/she/it or you (formal) have.
Teacher: Perfect. And from these we can find the other versions, so we have he for I have, and we have is:
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Hemos. And we have ha for he/she/it/you (formal). For you (informal), what would we do to ha?
Student: Has.
Teacher: Has. H-a-s, completely silent, this h, this h that we find in all of these forms. They have or you
   guys have:
Student: Han.
Teacher: Han. So, these are our different versions of haber. Now, these very sounds, so, the sounds, because
   we are not including the h, the sounds /e/, /emos/, /a/, /as/, /an/ are the same sounds that we add
   on to the “to” form of the verb to get this future tense. So, we have a verb like bailar, to dance. If
   I want to say I will dance, using this future tense, I can look at how is I have from haber, so, how
   is I have from haber?
Student: He.
Teacher: He. And I can just stick it on the end. But it’s the sound that is the same, what we are sticking on
   the end of the verb is an e, not the h-e. So, I will dance:
Student: Is it “bailáre” or bailaré?
Teacher: The ending takes the accent and we said that in Spanish we are pushing the accent into the future,
   which is an interesting phenomenon, we spoke about, how in Greek, for example, in the past you
   pull it back into the past, so we find this phenomenon occurring in other languages as well. Here
   we are literally pushing the accent into the future and we accent that ending and we say bailaré,
   bailaré, I will dance. We will dance:
Student: Bailaremos.
Teacher: Bailaremos. He/she/it/you (formal) will dance:
Student: Bailará.
Teacher: Bailará. They or you guys will dance:
Student: Bailarán.
Teacher: Bailarán. And you (informal):
Student: Bailarás.
Teacher: Bailarás. Good. So, we get the future tense without having to learn anything new, we just have to
   remember that we can look back at haber and see what the different versions of haber were, and
   then use them to build our future. So, in fact we have two future tenses, let’s say, we have will and
   would, they are both future tenses. Now, -e, -emos, -a, -as, -an, they work for all verbs -er, -ir, -ar,
   it doesn’t matter; they are all using these sounds to form will. And we have the same situation with
   would. -er, -ir, -ar verbs, they are all together. And our key sound for would is -ía. So, we add on
   -ía to the end of the verb, we are accenting it again, because it’s pushing the accent into the future,
   and this –ía actually gives us I/he/she/it and you formal. So, here I is jumping in with he/she/it and
   you formal. So, bailaría, bailaría, means I would dance, he would dance, she would dance, you
   (formal) would dance, or it would dance if you can think of some context where that would make
   sense. I think you can work out what the rest would be. So, let’s try.
   How would you say we would dance?
Student: Bailariámos.
Teacher: Good, the only thing is that the accent stays on the ía.
Student: Bailaríamos.
Teacher: Bailaríamos. Good. They or you guys:
Student: Bailarían.
Teacher: Bailarían. And you informal:
Student: Bailarías.
Teacher: Good. So, that’s it, that’s would. So they, would and will, share some characteristics, as they are
   both different futures. They share the characteristic that we are adding on to the full verb: bailar,
   bailaré: I will dance, bailar, bailaría: I would dance; and they share the characteristic that they
   are stressing the ending, that the accent is going to the ending, and they share the characteristic
   that for both futures we group all the verbs together: -ar, -er, -ir verbs, so for both futures we have
   one set of endings for all verb types. What was to go?
Student: Ir.
Teacher: Ir. Good. I would go:
Student: Iría.
Teacher: Yes, iría. So, this actually works for I, he, she, it, and you formal. So, in the would tense we have
   I jumping in with he, she, it, you formal. How would you say she wouldn’t go?
Student: No iría.
Teacher: Good. No iría. Good. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. How would you say I would eat?
Student: Comería.
Teacher: Good. I would eat, but I don’t have time:
Student: Comería, pero no tengo... hora?
Teacher: Tempo, tempo we have in English.
Student: Tiempo.
Teacher: Comería, pero no tengo tiempo. Good. How would you say transformation?
Student: Transformación.
Teacher: Transformación. Good. So, to transform:
Student: Transformar.
Teacher: Good. Transformar. How would you say it would transform?
Student: Transformaría.
Teacher: Transformaría. This, you would use it if you were to say it would transform something else, so
   you could say it would transform the situation, how would you say that, it would transform the
   situation?
Student: Transformaría la situación.
Teacher: Transformaría la situación. If you wanted to say it would transform, and you mean it would get
   transformed, it would undergo a transformation, then in Spanish you will say it would transform
   itself. Now, in English we just use the context to understand whether we mean to transform
   something else or it would transform, it would get transformed, but in Spanish most of the time
   you are going to want to put that itself. What is that itself?
Student: Se.
Teacher: Good. Itself, se. It would get transformed:
Student: Se transformaría.
Teacher: Good. Se transformaría. What is contamination?
Student: Contaminación.
Teacher: Contaminación. To contaminate:
Student: Contaminar.
Teacher: Contaminar. If you want to say it contaminates, how would you say it, it contaminates, present
   tense?
Student: Contamina.
Teacher: Contamina. So, contamina would mean it contaminates, it’s contaminating, maybe we are talking
   about the factory and we say contamina. If we want to say, it gets contaminated, we don’t really
   have this gets in Spanish, so in Spanish to give this meaning of it gets contaminated we will just
  say it contaminates itself. Now, it doesn’t mean that it’s responsible for its own contamination or
  that it is literally contaminating itself, it’s just the structure that we use to replace this gets that we
  don’t have in Spanish. So, if we want to say it gets contaminated, and we are talking about the
  river, we will just say it contaminates itself, even though we all understand that what we don’t
  mean is that the river is actually contaminating itself. So how would you say that, it contaminates
  itself, or it gets contaminated?
Student: Se contamina.
Teacher: Good. Se contamina. Good. How would you say it would get contaminated? So, it’s not that it
  would contaminate, it’s it would get contaminated:
Student: Se contaminaría.
Teacher: Good. Se contaminaría. What is imagination?
Student: Imaginación.
Teacher: Imaginación. And to imagine:
Student: Imaginar.
Teacher: Imaginar. Well done for converting the /j/ to /kh/. Imagination – imaginación - imaginar. I
  imagine:
Student: Imagino.
Teacher: Imagino. You will often hear in Spanish I imagine myself. How would that be?
Student: Me imagino.
Teacher: Me imagino. And here it doesn’t really change the meaning. Sometimes adding this myself, or
  herself, itself, yourself, etc., doesn’t really change the meaning very much. Imagino, me imagino,
  I imagine. How would you say I would imagine?
Student: Me imaginaría.
Teacher: Me imaginaría. Good. I would imagine that he doesn’t want to go: what is this that that we use?
  It’s the same as what.
Student: Que.
Teacher: Good. So, I would imagine:
Student: Me imaginaría.
Teacher: Me imaginaría. That:
Student: Que.
Teacher: He doesn’t want to go:
Student: No quiere ir.
Teacher: So, all together I would imagine that he doesn’t want to go:
Student: Me imaginaría que no quiere ir.
Teacher: Good. Me imaginaría que no quiere ir.
Spanish Track 42
Teacher: So we saw for would, the future tense of would, we have our key sound -ía, we have the key sound
   -ía which we are adding on to the end of the verb, and this gives you the version for I, he, she, it,
   and you formal. So, for this one we have I jumping in with he, she, it, you formal. So, we can take
   a verb like hablar and we can say I would speak. Hablar is to speak, and I would speak:
Student: Hablaría.
Teacher: Good. Hablaría. Good. We would speak:
Student: Hablariámos, hablaríamos.
Teacher: Hablaríamos. They would speak:
Student: Hablarían.
Teacher: Good. They wouldn’t speak:
Student: No hablarían.
Teacher: No hablarían. Good. The verb to like in Spanish is gustar.
Student: Gustar.
Teacher: Gustar. So, to like is gustar, but it works differently in Spanish, and the way it works in Spanish
   renders the translation to like as kind of complicated. It would be much better to translate gustar
   as to be pleasing. So, when you say I like it, what we want to say in Spanish is it is pleasing to me.
   That’s the way we say I like it in Spanish, it is pleasing to me. So, if you take gustar to mean to
   be pleasing or to please, how would you make it is pleasing or it pleases?
Student: Gusta.
Teacher: Gusta. Good, so that’s it is pleasing or it pleases. Now, if you want to say it is pleasing to me:
Student: Me gusta.
Teacher: Me gusta. And this is how you say I like it in Spanish, me gusta. So, a very common error that
   Spanish learners make is to say me gusto, to translate it like from English literally, I like, and they
   say gusto, but what does that mean then actually, if you say me gusto, what does it mean if gustar
   means to be pleasing?
Student: It means I please myself.
Teacher: Yes, it means I please myself, I like myself. So you want to be careful there, you don’t want to be
   walking around telling everybody how much you like yourself, me gusto mucho. No. Me gusta
   mucho, it pleases me. So, if you are saying I like them, then of course what you are saying is they
   please me, so we must take this inter step, this Spanglish step, to think about it literally, to think it
   through literally, so we are sure that we are getting the meaning that we want. So, how would you
   say I like them or they please me or they are pleasing to me?
Student: Me gustan.
Teacher: Good. Me gustan. Good. So how do you think you would say I would like, it would please me?
Student: Me gustaría.
Teacher: Good. Me gustaría. So, just like in English, you use this a lot in Spanish. Me gustaría, to eat now,
   I would like to eat now:
Student: Me gustaría comer ahora.
Teacher: Good. Me gustaría comer ahora. We would like to eat now, it would please us to eat now:
Student: Nos gustaríamo, it’s nos gustarían.
Teacher: It, it would please us, to eat now. So, you have this…
Student: Is nos gustarían correct?
Teacher: No, because you have this idea of nos, you have this plural idea and it’s manifesting itself in the
   verb, so you are not totally in control of your building process at the moment, you are letting some
   guess work come in, and you need to cut it, you need to start with the verb. It would please us. So,
   it would please:
Student: Gustaría.
Teacher: Exactly. So when you start with the verb you are in control.
Student: Right.
Teacher: Now you can say it would please us:
Student: Nos gustaría.
Teacher: To eat now:
Student: Comer ahora.
Teacher: Exactly, very good. Nos gustaría comer ahora. What was to see or to view?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Good. Ver. Good. I would like to see you, let’s speak informally, I would like to see you:
Student: Me gustaría verte.
Teacher: Good. Me gustaría verte. A couple of verbs, they contract a little bit when we add on our future
   endings. So when I say our future endings, I refer to both futures: will and would. For example, we
   have poder – to be able, and would be able is could: I would be able to go, I could go. So we have
   poder – to be able or can, and then we add -ía for would, and it would be podería, but this is a
   very common verb, and common verbs are much more subject to change and irregularities, so
   many years of podería-podería-podería-podería-podería – the /e/ got lost, the /e/ fell away, the
   /e/ of poder. So, I could, he could, she could, it could, you (formal) could is podría.
Student: Podría.
Teacher: Podría. You can give me the other versions of course. How would you say they could or you guys
   could?
Student: Podrían.
Teacher: Good. And you (informal):
Student: Podrías.
Teacher: Good. And we:
Student: Podríamos.
Teacher: Good. What was to come?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Could you come to my house? How was my house?
Student: Mi casa.
Teacher: Mi casa. Good. So, how would you say Could you come? And this is to come, we don’t say to here
  in English, but it’s a second verb, will be in the “to” form, Could you come to my house?
  Let’s speak informally.
Student: ¿Podrías venir a mi casa?
Teacher: Good. ¿Podrías venir a mi casa? To say or to tell is decir. So we have hablar, which is to speak
  or to talk, but to say or to tell is decir. Could you tell me something? Could you tell me something?
  And we are speaking informally still.
Student: ¿Me podrías decir algo?
Teacher: Good. ¿Me podrías decir algo? or ¿Podrías decirme algo? Could you tell me if you want to
  come? So, let’s start with could you tell me if, and I remind you that if is the same as yes.
Student: ¿Podrías decirme si quieres venir?
Teacher: Okay.
 Spanish Track 43
Teacher: Another verb that contracts in this way, losing its last e, like poder becoming podría is haber, to
   have. So I would have, how would it be? You're gonna add the -ía on haber, and it's gonna lose
   it's e like poder did. So how would it sound?
Student: Habría.
Teacher: Habría. So, habría means I would have, you would have (formally), he would have, she would
   have, it would have. Which means, now you can make sentences like I would have gone. I would
   have eaten something, but..., etc. So let's practice this. How would you say I would have gone?
   What's to go, first?
Student: Ir.
Teacher: Ir. How would you make gone from to go? What is the rule to get gone from to go? The version
   that we need after haber. After any version of haber, doesn't matter if it's he, hemos, or habría,
   it's the version of the verb that comes after haber. How do we get that version?
Student: Ido.
Teacher: Yes. Ok, I take away -ir, the ending. It's the whole verb. But whatever, it doesn't matter. I'm taking
   away the ending, -ir, and I'm putting -ido. Good. I would have gone:
Student: Habría ido.
Teacher: Good. Habría ido. We would have eaten, how would that be? We would have eaten:
Student: Habríamos comido.
Teacher: Good. Habríamos comido. We could even make a sentence now, like We would have been able
   to go. We would have been able to go. And as long as you tackle each individual part individually,
   you will stay in control. And you will be able to make these apparently really complicated
   sentences, which are actually quite simple because they take the same structure in English and
   Spanish. So, we would have, how would that be? We would have:
Student: Habríamos.
Teacher: Good. Been able. So what's to be able, related to power?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Ahh. Poder is to be able. How would you make that been able, or just the version after haber?
   What does it do when it comes after haber?
Student: Podido.
Teacher: To go:
Student: Ir.
Teacher: Good. Habríamos podido ir. We would have been able to go. Good. You could say they would
   have been able to eat. So, divide it up block by block, and it is very simple.
Student: They would have.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Habrían podido comer.
Teacher: Habrían podido comer. So if you were to say something like they would have come to eat, then
   come is a verb of motion. So how would you say they would have come to eat?
Student: Habrían venido a comer.
Teacher: Habrían venido a comer, because we have venir, a verb of motion, connecting to another to form.
   Good. With this very useful structure of habría, habrían, habríamos, would have, you could also
   say something like I would have liked it. You just need to think in this Spanglish, in this in between
   language, the literal translation of how we want to say it in English, and then convert it. So, I would
   have liked it is it would have pleased me. It would have pleased me. So to not lose our control and
   to stay in control of this process, where is the first place we want our thoughts to go?
Student: It would have.
Teacher: Yeah. It would have. Good. So what is it would have?
Student: Habría.
Teacher: Good. Pleased. So it's gustar after haber. So maybe it's better to think of it in this way, “I'm
  finding the version of the verb after haber,” instead of actually trying to find the translation of the
  word, because the versions after have are so different in English. We have eaten, gone, walked, so
  if we are looking for walked, gone, or eaten, and we forget that it's just the version after haber, we
  might be looking for a very long time, ah? So, the version after haber, we have -ado or -ido, no?
Student: Gustado.
Teacher: Good. So now we can make the sentence, It would have pleased me, I would have liked it.
Student: Me habría gustado.
Teacher: Good. Me habría gustado. Good. So, I would have liked it. How would you say we would have
  liked it – so - it would have pleased us?
Student: So it's nos habría gustado.
Teacher: Very good. Nos habría gustado. And maybe, you might want to say we would have liked them.
  First give me the Spanglish, the literal translation in English. So we want to say we would have
  liked them. What is the literal translation of how we put it into Spanish?
Student: They would have pleased us.
Teacher: Perfect. Well done. They would have pleased us. So now you have all you need to make that
  sentence.
Student: Habrían. Nos habrían gustado.
Teacher: Good. Nos habrían gustado, they would have pleased us, we would have liked them. So we just
  saw some complicated structures with this would, which is especially useful because we can make
  could, and we can make would have. We can also make should with this would. What was to owe,
  or must, which was related to debt in English?
Student: Deber.
Teacher: Deber. Good. -er verb. Deber. Now if you say would owe, this means should. How would you say
  then, I should, he should, it should, she should, you (formal) should?
Student: Debería.
Teacher: Yes. Debería. Good. How would you say you should come to my house? You should come to my
  house (informal):
Student: Deberías venir a mi casa.
Teacher: Good. Deberías venir a mi casa. Good. You should come to my house to eat. You should come to
  my house to eat: (Informally, still.)
Student: Deberías venir a mi casa a comer.
Teacher: Good. Deberías venir a comer a mi casa, or deberías venir a mi casa a comer, both are perfectly
  fine. Well done. How would you say we should?
Student: Deberíamos.
Teacher: Good. How would you say we should speak?
Student: Deberíamos hablado.
Teacher: Here, speak is to speak. The confusion might come that in English, after can, after should, after
  must, we don't say to. I must eat, not I must to eat. I can eat, not I can to eat. In Spanish, you're
  just using the to form afterwards. So, we should speak, we should speak:
Student: Deberíamos hablar.
Teacher: Good. We should speak. Deberíamos hablar. We should speak about it: (And we said we don't
  need about.)
Student: Deberíamos hablarlo.
Teacher: Good. Deberíamos hablarlo. We should speak about it, we should speak it. What if you wanted
  to say we should speak to him?
Student: Deberíamos hablarle.
Teacher: Good. Deberíamos hablarle. This could actually be to him or to her or to you (formal), no?
  Deberíamos hablarle. What if you wanted to say we should speak to them or we should speak to
  you guys?
Student: Deberíamos hablarles.
Teacher: Good. Deberíamos hablarles. How would you say we should speak with him?
Student: Deberíamos hablar con él.
Teacher: Good. And with her:
Student: Con ella.
Teacher: All together?
Student: Deberíamos hablar con ella.
Teacher: Good. So choosing these structures, you get around the ambiguity of deberíamos hablarle, which
   could mean him or her or you (formal). Now if we use con, we see very clearly who we mean.
   Deberíamos hablar con él. Deberíamos hablar con ella. Good. To give is dar. Dar. To give.
   How would you say I would give?
Student: Daría.
Teacher: Daría. They would give:
Student: Darían
Teacher: Good. They would give me, or to me:
Student: Me darían.
Teacher: Good. They would give me it:
Student: Me lo darían.
Teacher: Good.
Spanish Track 44
Teacher: What was the word for problem in Spanish?
Student: Problema.
Teacher: Problema. And the problem:
Student: El problema.
Teacher: El problema. Good. We can see it ends in an a, so we would expect it to be feminine, but we saw
  that these words ending -ma in Spanish, many of them entered through Greek. And in Greek they're
  neuter, but they look a bit masculine in Greek, so they came into Spanish as masculine words even
  though they end in a. So we have el problema. System:
Student: Sistema.
Teacher: Sistema. The system:
Student: El sistema.
Teacher: Good. The paradigm: how do you think that would be in Spanish?
Student: El paradigma.
Teacher: El paradigma. Good. Scheme also came in from Greek. But scheme in Spanish means outline or
  diagram. How do you think that would be?
Student: El squima. Squema. El squema.
Teacher: Good, and something else to make it sound a bit more Spanish?
Student: El esquema.
Teacher: Very good. El esquema. We said that we cannot start s plus another consonant in Spanish. We
  have to put an e before, like Spain, España, spaghetti, espagueti. El esquema, so this would be
  outline or diagram. Diagram is another one of these words. How do you think that would be in
  Spanish?
Student: Diagrama.
Teacher: Good. And the diagram:
Student: El diagrama.
Teacher: El diagrama. Good. So mostly, words ending /o/ are masculine and words ending /a/ are feminine,
   but we might find some exceptions. Planeta, for example, what do you think that means? Planeta:
Student: Planet.
Teacher: Planeta is a masculine word. So the planet:
Student: El planeta.
Teacher: El planeta. A planet:
Student: Un planeta.
Teacher: Un planeta, very good. How would you say the planets?
Student: Los planetas.
Teacher: Very good, los planetas. Good. So this is a masculine word that looks feminine. How was the
   word for car? We saw various words.
Student: Auto.
Teacher: Auto, let's work with that one. How do you say the car?
Student: El auto.
Teacher: The cars:
Student: Los autos.
Teacher: Los autos. Good. If you want to say this car, you say este auto. Este auto.
Student: Este auto.
Teacher: Good. We saw esta noche, this night. What do you think is the difference between este and esta,
   then? If we have este auto and esta noche, what do you think is the difference?
Student: Este is the masculine -
Teacher: Good.
Student: And esta the feminine.
Teacher: Good. So, we see that noche is a feminine word. How would you say the night?
Student: La noche.
Teacher: La noche. The nights:
Student: Las noches.
Teacher: Good. But this night, or tonight:
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. Good. If you take this t out of este and esta, the words for this, you get the word for
   that. So este auto is this car. And that car would be?
Student: Ese auto.
Teacher: Ese auto. How would you say I want that car?
Student: Quiero ese auto.
Teacher: Good. I don't want that car, because it's very big. Big is grand so how would that be in Spanish?
Student: Grande.
Teacher: Grande. I don't want that car, because it's very big:
Student: No quiero ese auto, porque es muy grande.
Teacher: Very good. No quiero ese auto, porque es muy grande. How was this night?
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: And how would be that night?
Student: Esa noche.
Teacher: Esa noche. We just get rid of the t and then we have the word for that. What if you wanted to say
   those nights?
Student: Esas noches.
Teacher: Esas noches. Good. There are also a few words that end in o which are feminine. For example,
   mano. Mano means hand. Ends in o, but it's a feminine word. So how would you say the hand?
Student: La mano.
Teacher: La mano. Good. The hands:
Student: Las manos.
Teacher: Las manos. This hand:
Student: Esta mano.
Teacher: Good. That hand:
Student: Esa mano.
Teacher: Good. These hands:
Student: Estas manos.
Teacher: Good. We have this word in English, like in manuscript, manual, as well. Manual, manuscript,
   that man- bit there means hand. Maintain, which in Spanish is mantener. We have main- or man-
   means hand. Manage. Manage means to handle. Actually, it has a special use for handling horses,
   historically. Which is interesting, because to manage, manejar, is used in some Latin American
   countries to mean to drive. Other than to manage or to handle, it also means to drive, manejar,
   which is interesting because this verb manage historically had the special use to handle horses,
   and we see how that's kind of translated over the years to driving. How would you say Can you
   give me a hand? So this is a literal translation of something idiomatic in English, but it works in
   Spanish as well. In Spanish you say this. Can you give me a hand? And let's talk informally.
Student: ¿Me puedes dar un mano?
Teacher: But it's -
Student: Una mano.
Teacher: Good. ¿Puedes darme?, or ¿me puedes dar?, una mano. How would you say Could you give me
   a hand? Could you give me a hand? So could is would can.
Student: ¿Me podrías dar una mano?
Teacher: Good. ¿Me podrías dar una mano? ¿Podrías darme una mano? You should give me a hand.
   You should give me a hand. Should is would owe. Still informal.
Student: Deber. Debería. You should. Deberías. Me deberías dar una mano.
Teacher: Me deberías dar una mano. Here we're not asking though, it sounded like a question.
Student: Oh, sorry.
Teacher: You should give me a hand.
Student: Oh, yes.
Teacher: Give it to me again, not like a question. Like a statement. You should give me a hand:
Student: Deberías darme una mano.
Teacher: Good. And what if you were speaking to more than one person?
Student: Deberían darme una mano.
Teacher: Good. Deberían darme una mano. You guys should give us a hand:
Student: Nos deberían dar una mano.
Teacher: Good. So we said that manejar means to handle or to manage. Manejar.
Student: Manejar.
Teacher: And also to drive, in some Latin American countries. How do you say I am managing the problem,
   or I manage the problem?
Student: Manejo el problema.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I'm managing the problem, and you mean right now. So I remind
   you that for managing, for -ar verbs to get this -ing, we take away -ar and we put -ando. And for
   -er/-ir verbs, for this -ing, we take away the -er or the -ir, and we put -iendo. First part is I am
   managing. I am managing:
Student: Estoy manejando.
Teacher: Good. I am managing the problem:
Student: Estoy manejando el problema.
Teacher: Good. Estoy manejando el problema. So mano, we said, ends in o and it's feminine. It's actually
   kind of the only true word that ends in o and is feminine. So, for example we have la foto, the foto.
   But foto is short for fotografía. So it's actually la fotografía becomes la foto. The same with la
   moto. The motorbike is actually la motocicleta. No? Then people say moto and foto and it stays
   with la. To take in Spanish is tomar. Tomar.
Student: Tomar.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I'm taking a photo, and you mean right now?
Student: Estoy tomando una foto.
Teacher: Good. Estoy tomando una foto. You might hear sacar as well, for photo. Sacar or tomar. Estoy
   tomando una foto. Estoy sacando una foto. Let's use tomar for now. I would take a photo:
Student: Tomaría una foto.
Teacher: Tomaría una foto. I would like, so it would please me, to take a photo. So what is to please, or
   like?
Student: Gustar.
Teacher: Gustar. So it would please me, I would like, it would please me to take a photo:
Student: Me gustaría tomar una foto.
Teacher: Good. Me gustaría tomar una foto. But I don't have my camera. But I don't have my camera:
Student: Pero no tengo mi cámara.
Teacher: Good. All together. I would like to take a photo, it would please me to take a photo, but I don't
   have my camera:
Student: Me gustaría tomar un foto-
Teacher: Fotografía.
Student: Una foto, pero no tengo mi cámara.
Teacher: Very good. Me gustaría tomar una foto, pero no tengo mi cámara. Very good.
  Spanish Track 45
Teacher: So how was to like, or we said that the translation that we would give it in Spanish was to please
   or to be pleasing to?
Student: Me gusta.
Teacher: So, the "to" version?
Student: Gustar.
Teacher: Gustar. Good. So how would you say we like it, and we want to take the route of the literal
   translation, so it is pleasing to us?
Student: Nos gustamos.
Teacher: So remember the first place you want your thoughts to go. This is very important, ah.
Student: Well, so gustar becomes gustamos.
Teacher: It is pleasing, to us. So, it is pleasing:
Student: Gusta.
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Nos gusta.
Teacher: Nos gusta. We were saying that gustar, we can translate as to please or to be pleasing. Now it
   would probably make more sense for us to store it as to be pleasing. Because, if we want to say
   something like she likes it, what we will say is it is pleasing to her. So we have the to her with
   gustar, so that's why it makes more sense to translate it as it is pleasing to her rather than it pleases
   her. This way we store this idea of to. So what is to her?
Student: Le.
Teacher: Le. Good. So we have la for her, and to her, le. So if you want to say it is pleasing to her, or she
   likes it, how would it be?
Student: Le gusta.
Teacher: Le gusta. And it is pleasing to them, or they like it:
Student: Les gusta.
Teacher: Good. Les gusta. You had a little battle there, right, with whether it was gustan or not. Good. And
   you take control of that going it is pleasing, gusta. It is pleasing to them, les gusta. So with gustar,
   we're not using lo and la and los and las. We're using le and les. They like it, it is pleasing to them.
   Les gusta. How would you say they like them, or they are pleasing to them?
Student: Les gustan.
Teacher: Good. Les gustan. He likes them, or they are pleasing to him:
Student: Le gustan.
Teacher: Very good. So there are a couple of other verbs as well that we would prefer to give this kind of
   translation to. What do you think interesar means? Interesar:
Student: Interesting.
Teacher: Interesante is interesting. What does interesar look like? It might not be, but what does it look
   like? Interesar. What type of word does it look like?
Student: It's a verb.
Teacher: Ah.
Student: So it's to interest.
Teacher: Good. To interest. Good. So this helps us with comprehension as well, understanding what are our
   types of words and what they tend to look like. So we could translate it as to interest, or we could
   translate it as to be interesting to. And here in this case, it's another verb like gustar, in that it
   makes more sense to translate it for ourselves as to be interesting to, because it goes with le and
   not lo. So in our minds this fits then in the Spanish structure if we save that translation as to be
   interesting to rather than to interest. So how would you say it interests me, it is interesting to me?
Student: Me interesa.
Teacher: Good. Me interesa. Does it interest you? Let's speak informally. Does it interest you?:
Student: ¿Te interesa?
Teacher: ¿Te interesa? Doesn't it interest you?:
Student: ¿No te interesa?
Teacher: ¿No te interesa? Why doesn't it interest you?:
Student: ¿Por qué no te interesa?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qué no te interesa? So if we want to say it interests him, what we're really saying is
   it is interesting to him. So we want to him here. So how would you say that? It interests him or it's
   interesting to him:
Student: Le interesa.
Teacher: Good. Le interesa. They're interested in it. It's interesting to them:
Student: Les interesa.
Teacher: Good. Les interesa. You remember how was to dance, related to ballerina?
Student: Bailar.
Teacher: Bailar. Good. So you can ask does it interest her to dance tonight? Does it interest her to dance
   tonight?:
Student: ¿Le interesa bailar esta noche?
Teacher: Good. ¿Le interesa bailar esta noche? Good. Salir, salir is to leave or to go out. To leave or to
   go out. So you can say does it interest her, is it interesting to her to go out to dance tonight? Does
   it interest her to go out to dance tonight? So let's go from the beginning, does it interest her?:
Student: ¿Le interesa?
Teacher: Good. ¿Le interesa? And of course le interesa could mean does it interest her, does it interest
   him, does it interest you (formal). We don't know by the le. Le interesa, to go out to dance tonight:
Student: Salir a bailar esta noche.
Teacher: Good. So here we have a because salir is a verb of coming and going. ¿Le interesa salir a bailar
   esta noche? Now what if you wanted to ask would it interest you, would it be interesting to you,
   informally? So what was our sound for would, that we add on to the “to” form of the verb?
   What's our key sound for would?
Student: -ía
Teacher: -ía, good. Would it interest you?:
Student: Interaría.
Teacher: Slower.
Student: Interesar, interesaría. ¿Te interesaría?
Teacher: Good. Another verb like this is parecer. Parecer, which is to seem. But, in English we already put
   to. It seems to me. It seems to him. So how do you say it seems to me? Parecer is to seem. It seems
   to me:
Student: Me paresa.
Teacher: Before you change a verb, there's something very quick and very essential that you must do.
Student: It's an -er, not an -ar.
Teacher: Yes. You must go back to your takeoff point, which is the "to" form, and make a quick check.
   Parecer, -er verb. Ok, I know where I am, I know what I'm doing.
Student: Me parece.
Teacher: Me parece. It seems to me. It seems to me that. What is this that that we put here? Same as what:
Student: Que.
Teacher: Que. Spanish kind of highlights for you that what is the question version of that. It kinds of shows
   you that much more clearly than English does. But English shows you as well. If you think, in
   English if you take the word that and you get rid of the t and you replace it with a w, you get what.
   In the same way that if you take the word there and you get rid of the t and you replace it with w,
   you get where. Or if you take the word then and get rid of the t and replace it with w, you get when.
   So you have que for that, and then qué for what. Same word. So, it seems to me that:
Student: Me parece que.
Teacher: He doesn't want to go out tonight. He doesn't want to go out tonight:
Student: No quiere salir esta noche.
Teacher: Good. Me parece que no quiere salir esta noche. Good. How would you say it seems to me that
   he doesn't like it? It seems to me that he doesn't like it. Now in English, this that is optional. No?
   It seems to me he doesn't like it. It seems to me that he doesn't like it. It's optional. But in Spanish,
   it's obligatory. You want to put this that. And actually, it's really gonna help you think out your
   sentences to put that always. So, it seems to me that he doesn't like it:
Student: Me parece que no lo gusta. Le. No le gusta.
Teacher: Good. You might want to say me parece bien. That would mean it seems good to me, it seems fine
   to me. But we're not using the word good, we're using the word well. Bien. Me parece bien. It
   seems to me well. You'll find a little gray area between English and Spanish about when we say
   good, bueno, and when we say well, bien. But it's something you'll pick up listening. So here you
   would say well, it seems well to me, it seems good to me:
Student: Me parece bien.
Teacher: Good. Me parece bien. It doesn't seem good to me:
Student: No me parece bien.
Teacher: Good. No me parece bien. It doesn't seem good to her, or to him, or to you (formal):
Student: No le parece bien.
Teacher: Good. Now let's make it a question. Doesn't it seem ok to you?:
Student: ¿No le parece bien?
Teacher: Good. ¿No le parece bien? What was to interest?
Student: Interesar.
Teacher: Interesar. How would you say it would interest me, it would interest me?
Student: Me interesaría.
Teacher: Good. It would interest me to see it:
Student: Me interesaría verlo.
Teacher: Good. To put, we said was poner. Poner.
Student: Poner.
Teacher: Poner. And we said that it's an interesting verb because when we have -pose inside a verb in
   English, we can change that -pose to poner and we get the verb in Spanish. So for example, to
   compose in Spanish is componer. And this com- is actually con-. The n changes next to the p, so
   it literally means “with putting”. To compose is “with putting”, putting together. Compose,
   componer. To suppose:
Student: Suponer.
Teacher: Suponer. To oppose:
Student: Oponer.
Teacher: Oponer. To impose:
Student: Imponer.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I want to put it here? I want to put it here:
Student: Quiero ponerlo aquí.
Teacher: Good. Quiero ponerlo aquí. I would like to put it here. It would please me:
Student: Me gustaría ponerlo aquí.
Teacher: Good. Now if you want to say I want to put salt on it, you don't need to say on. What do you think
   you can replace this on it with? So instead of saying on it, what do you think you might be able to
   say in Spanish? What is the word for it:
Student: Lo.
Teacher: And what do you think you could to do that to make it like on it? How do you say to it:
Student: Ah, lo.
Teacher: This is not how you say to it.
Student: No, it's not.
Teacher: Ah, so how do you say to it, for it, from it:
Student: Le.
Teacher: Le. So, if you want to say I want to put salt on it, you don't say on it, you just say le. Salt is sal,
   sal. So how would you say I want to put it salt, and with this it we mean on it.
Student: Quiero ponerle sal.
Teacher: Good. Quiero ponerle sal. I would like to put salt on it:
Student: Me gustaría ponerle sal.
Teacher: Good. Me gustaría ponerle sal. A little, a little is un poco. Un poco. Literally a little, un poco.
Student: Un poco.
Teacher: Good. So you could say I would like to put it a little more, what was the word for more, like in
   more late?
Student: Más.
Teacher: I would like to put it a little more salt, I would like to put on it a little more salt:
Student: Me gustaría ponerle un poco más sal.
Teacher: Very good. Me gustaría ponerle un poco más sal. What if you wanted to say I would like to put
   on them a little more salt? You know maybe you mean las papas fritas. The chips, the french
   fries. I would like to put on them a little more salt:
Student: Me gustaría ponerles un poco más sal.
Teacher: Very good. Me gustaría ponerles un poco más sal.
 Spanish Track 46
Teacher: In English we have many ways to talk about the past. If you get any random verb like to eat, for
  example, you can say I ate. You can say I have eaten. You can say I was eating. You can say I
  used to eat. You can say I would eat an ice cream every week when I was a child, and there you
  use would to speak about the past in English. I would go to the cinema every day when I was young.
  So we have many different ways of talking about the past, but we can divide them into three. And
  in Spanish there are three. We have the I have eaten past, which is the one that we learnt already.
  I have eaten, with haber. And then the other two pasts we can think of as a line in the past and a
  dot in the past. So, what would fit into the line in the past is I was eating, I used to eat, I would eat
  all the time when I was younger, all of that is ongoing. It’s like a line in the past. But then the dot
  in the past is I ate, finished. I ate, that’s your dot in the past. Those are what we will consider our
  three different pasts, which all of the different ways of expressing the past in English fit into, and
  in Spanish we have these three forms. The one we learnt already is I have eaten, for example. First
  we need to manage the verb to have. What is the verb for to have in this context?
Student: Haber.
Teacher: Haber. Good. So we have haber, and we had a neat trick to find the different versions of haber,
  as we know it’s very irregular. So what is I have?
Student: He.
Teacher: Good. And we have:
Student: Hemos.
Teacher: Good. And what is he/she/it/you (formal) have or has?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Good. And you, informally:
Student: Has.
Teacher: Good. And they have or you guys have:
Student: Han.
Teacher: So that’s our panorama of haber. And then we need to find eaten. So, the version after haber, we
   want to think of it in this way, the version of the verb that comes after haber, rather than trying to
   translate eaten because the version of the verb that comes after have in English is often so different.
   I have wanted. I have been. Very different. But in Spanish, for –ar verbs we take off -ar and
   put -ado, and for –er/-ir verbs we take off the -er or -ir and we put -ido. So I have eaten:
Student: He comerido. Sorry, comido.
Teacher: Good. You’re taking off your ending and putting -ido. The only times we’re adding onto the “to”
   forms is with the futures, will and would. He comido. I have spoken:
Student: He hablado.
Teacher: He hablado. Good. I have danced:
Student: He bailado.
Teacher: Good. They have danced:
Student: Han bailado.
Teacher: Han bailado. The version that comes after haber: comido, bailado, doesn’t change for I or for
   we or for they or for he or she. Always the same. We need to focus on haber to get the correct
   version of haber, and then we have the version of the verb that comes after it. So he bailado, han
   bailado, hemos bailado. We can also say more complicated things like I have been able to eat.
   What is to be able, related to power?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Poder. Good. So I have been able, the version that comes after haber. Rather than translating been
   able, we just want poder after haber, so let’s do that first. I have been able:
Student: He podido.
Teacher: To eat:
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Good. He podido comer. I have been able to eat. I haven’t been able to eat:
Student: No he podido comer.
Teacher: Good. No he podido comer. So we can make more interesting structures as well, like this, using
   haber. We can also put haber in would time, which gives us the opportunity to make some useful
   structures. What is our sound for would?
Student: -ía.
Teacher: So I would have from haber:
Student: Habría.
Teacher: Good. The /e/ fell out. Habría. What was to leave or to go out?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. So you can say I would have gone out. I would have gone out:
Student: He saliría?
Teacher: So you’ve taken the sentence as a block to translate it all together, and then you have this kind of
   salad situation where this -ía’s coming out in the wrong place. You must take the time to divide it
   up. I would have is your first bit, and you stop there. I would have, what’s that?
Student: Habería. Habría.
Teacher: Habría. Good, and it’s a very natural irregularity. You can imagine many years of saying habería,
   habería, habería, habería, habería, it happens very naturally for that e to fall out. It only happens
   with a few verbs, though. Habría. So I would have gone out:
Student: Habría salido.
Teacher: Habría salido. Good. I would have been able to go out. I would have been able to go out:
Student: Habría podido salir.
Teacher: Good. Habría podido salir. I wouldn’t have been able to go out. I wouldn’t have been able to go
   out:
Student: No habría podido salir.
Teacher: Good. No habría podido salir. Good. So we have this haber that we can use for the past, but then
  also we can make some other very useful structures out of it, like would have, would have been
  able, etc. So now we’re going to focus on another past in Spanish. We’re going to focus now on
  the line in the past. So the line in the past representing I was eating, I used to eat, I would eat all
  the time, that would that we use for past. All of those are represented by this line in the past. Now,
  for the pasts – for both pasts, the line and the point – again we are taking off our verb ending before
  we add on our endings for the past. So we have a verb like hablar, for example, an –ar verb, and
  we will take off this -ar and we will put -aba, -aba, to get I/he/she/it/you (formal). So again, like
  in would time, we have I jumping in with he, she, it, and you (formal). So you have hablar, you
  take off the -ar and you put -aba:
Student: Hablaba.
Teacher: Hablaba. Hablaba. So hablaba means I was speaking, I used to speak, he was speaking, she was
  speaking, he used to speak, she used to speak, you were speaking, you used to speak, all of this in
  hablaba. Now you can probably make the other versions. How would you say you were speaking,
  speaking informally?
Student: Hablabas.
Teacher: Good. And they or you guys were speaking:
Student: Hablaban.
Teacher: Hablaban. And for the we version, the accent’s going to stay in the same place on -aba. So how
  would you say we were speaking?
Student: Hablábamos.
Teacher: Hablábamos. Good. To wait is esperar. Esperar, to wait or to hope.
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: So how would you say I was waiting, I used to wait?
Student: Esperaba.
Teacher: Good. I was waiting for you, speaking informally? And we don’t need the for, no? I was awaiting
   you:
Student: Te esperaba.
Teacher: Te esperaba. What if you were speaking formally? If you were speaking to usted and you wanted
   to say I was waiting for you:
Student: Is it lo?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Lo esperaba.
Teacher: Or to a female, it would be?
Student: La esperaba.
Teacher: Good. So lo and la other than it and he and she can also mean you (formal). We see those are
   always pairing together – he, she, it, and you (formal). Keeping it formal, speaking to usted, how
   would you say We were waiting for you?
Student: Lo esperábamos.
Teacher: Good. Lo esperábamos. Very good. And what if you wanted to say We were waiting for you guys?
Student: Los esperábamos.
Teacher: Los esperábamos. And of course, this could also mean We were waiting for them. Los
   esperábamos. To try, related to intent:
Student: Intentar.
Teacher: Good. Intentar. So how would you say I was trying?
Student: Intentaba.
Teacher: Good. Intentaba. He was trying:
Student: Intentaba.
Teacher: Good. What was to find, to encounter?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say They were trying to find it? They were trying to find it: so divide up
  the thoughts. They were trying, the first bit:
Student: Intentaba? It’s intentaban.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Encontrarlo.
Teacher: Good. Intentaban encontrarlo. If you wanted to say They were trying to find it for me, the most
  natural way of saying this in Spanish is They were trying to find me it. They were trying to find me
  it:
Student: Intentaban encontrármelo.
Teacher: Intentaban encontrármelo. Good. They were trying to find me it. But if you wanted to emphasize
  They were trying to find me it, then you could say this sentence in the way that we would probably
  say it in English, which is They were trying to find it for me. Then you could do that in Spanish.
  You have that option. So how would you say that? They were trying to find it for me, using the
  word for:
Student: Intentaban encontrarlo para mí.
Teacher: Good. Intentaban encontrarlo para mí. So here we are emphasizing, actually me. But mostly in
  Spanish we kind of avoid the use of the preposition, as we’ve been noticing. Intentaban
  encontrármelo.
 Spanish Track 47
Teacher: The dinner in Spanish is la cena, spelt c-e-n-a, la cena.
Student: La cena.
Teacher: La cena. Those in Spain will pronounce /la thena/. So la cena, the dinner. Now, to dine, which
   doesn’t sound formal in Spanish as it does in English, to dine, you just make la cena into a verb.
   So how do you think that would sound?
Student: Cenar.
Teacher: Cenar. Good. So cenar is to dine. So how would you say I was dining, or more naturally in
   English, I was having dinner?
Student: Cenaba.
Teacher: Good. Cenaba. Now, apart from I was having dinner, what else can that mean? Cenaba?
Student: He/she/it were having dinner.
Teacher: And? Who else?
Student: You (formal).
Teacher: Good. So we have all of those meanings there with the -aba. So for this line in the past we have -aba
   for -ar verbs. We are taking off our -ar and we're putting -aba as our key sound, and then we are
   adding on more, so n or s. Quemar, q-u-e-m-a-r, quemar in Spanish is to burn.
Student: Quemar.
Teacher: Quemar. Good. How would you say He was burning the dinner? He was burning the dinner:
Student: Quemaba la cena.
Teacher: Good. Quemaba la cena. And if you wanted to show that it was he that was burning the dinner,
   how would you do that?
Student: Just él. Él quemaba la cena.
Teacher: Good. And if you wanted to show that it was you (formal), You were burning the dinner:
Student: Usted quemaba la cena.
Teacher: Good. Usted quemaba la cena. Good. So Él quemaba la cena, he was burning, and then we say
   what he was burning: the dinner. If we want to say The dinner was burning, The dinner was getting
   burnt, we can’t just say La cena quemaba, because we are waiting to hear what was the dinner
   burning? It feels incomplete. So if you want to just say The dinner was burning, like The dinner
   was getting burnt, in Spanish we are going to say The dinner was burning itself. What is itself?
Student: Se.
Teacher: Se. So how would you say The dinner was burning, The dinner was getting burnt, The dinner was
   burning itself?
Student: La cena se quemaba.
Teacher: Very good. That’s it! La cena se quemaba. Good. The position of la cena is also flexible. You
   can say La cena se quemaba or you can put la cena afterwards. How would that be?
Student: Se quemaba la cena.
Teacher: Se quemaba la cena. So it’s flexible, unlike in English, because in English, well we don’t really
   change verbs so much. There are not so many grammatical resources in English as there are in
   Spanish, for example, so in English the word order is much more important than in Spanish to
   show what’s going on. So we can say La cena se quemaba or Se quemaba la cena. Because we
   have se, we understand that the dinner was getting burnt, there was nobody else there involved. If
   you want to say I burn, like in the sun, in the sense of, you know, I get burnt, you’re also going to
   use this structure, no? You’re going to say I burn myself in the sun. Now you understand you’re
   not burning yourself, it just means I get burnt. So sun is sol. In was:
Student: En.
Teacher: En. So I get burnt, I burn in the sun, how would that be? And sun is masculine.
Student: Me quemo en el sol.
Teacher: Good. Me quemo en el sol. You can’t just say Quemo en el sol, because this would mean that I
   burn something in the sun, and we will be waiting to hear what you burn in the sun. Me quemo
   en el sol. If you want to say The sun burns me, this is another way you could put the sentence, and
   there we are not using this “self” structure, because we have The sun burns and then we have me
   telling us what it burns, so it’s complete. So how would you say that, the sun burns me?
Student: El sol me quema.
Teacher: Good. El sol me quema. Me quema el sol. Either way. Another example of a verb like this is
   romper. Romper. Romper means – maybe you can guess it. What do you think romper means?
   It’s quite obscure, the connection, but you might find it. Rupture?
Student: To break.
Teacher: To break. Romper, to break. So how would you say I break?
Student: Rompo.
Teacher: Rompo, with a p, rompo. I break it:
Student: Lo rompo.
Teacher: Lo rompo. Good. I break it. If you want to say it breaks, like it gets broken, it breaks all the time.
   All the time is todo el tiempo. Literally all, todo, el tiempo, the time. Todo, t-o-d-o, is all. So It
   breaks all the time, It breaks itself, it gets broken, all the time. How would you say that? It breaks
   all the time:
Student: Se rompa todo –
Teacher: The se got your attention, so you forgot to do something very important, which was to quickly go
   back to the “to” form and be clear on what type of verb you’re working with.
Student: Se rompe todo el tiempo.
Teacher: Good. Se rompe todo el tiempo. It breaks all the time. So here we understand that it gets broken,
   it breaks itself. How would you say they break all the time?
Student: It’s rompen. And, Se rompen todo el tiempo.
Teacher: Se rompen todo el tiempo. They break themselves, not literally that they are breaking themselves,
   just they get broken. We don’t have this get in Spanish, and this is how we get around it.
   What was tonight?
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. So we said esta is this for feminine words. Esta noche. What was this for masculine
   words? How did we say this car?
Student: Este auto.
Teacher: Este auto. Este coche. Good. So este is this for masculine words. And we have the /e/ of el, like
   el auto, in este. Este auto. These cars are estos autos. So we go from este to estos for the plural.
   Not estes. Ah? Estos. Estos autos.
Student: Estos autos.
Teacher: Now this might look irregular, but there is a logic there, it’s just different to the one that we might
   expect. We have the /e/ of el in este, and we have the /os/ of los in estos. So we have the car:
Student: El coche.
Teacher: Good. And this car:
Student: Este coche.
Teacher: Good. The cars:
Student: Los coches.
Teacher: Los coches. And these cars:
Student: Estos coches.
Teacher: Estos coches. So we have /os/ in los and estos, and we have /e/ in el and este. All of those you can
   make that and those now, just by plucking out the t. So if este auto is this car, how do you say
   that car?
Student: Ese auto.
Teacher: Ese auto. If estos coches or estos autos are these cars, how would you say those cars?
Student: Esos autos.
Teacher: Esos autos. Good. So how would you say those ones and for those ones you can just use this word
  for those and imagine me talking about masculine things or mixed things, things of mixed gender.
  Those ones break all the time, those ones break all the time:
Student: Esos rompen todo el tiempo.
Teacher: So now I’m waiting to hear what they break. Esos rompen todo el tiempo.
Student: Ah.
Teacher: What do they break all the time?
Student: Esos se rompen todo el tiempo.
Teacher: Good. Esos se rompen todo el tiempo. So you will have to listen out in Spanish for these verbs
  that want you to show it when their action isn’t to something else. It’s transforming, not something
  else, se transforma. It breaks, it’s breaking, not something else, se rompe. It’s changing, not
  something else, but here you don’t need it. Cambia, from cambiar. Cambia. Being aware that
  this occurs is enough, and we will listen out and in real life get a conscious understanding and also
  an intuition about where we need to do this.
 Spanish Track 48
Teacher: We said that for -ar verbs, we take away the -ar and we put -aba to get this line in the past. So
   cenar, to dine or to have dinner. Cenaba, I was having dinner, I was dining, I used to have dinner,
   I used to dine. Now for -er/-ir verbs, we take away our -er/-ir ending and we put -ía. Where did
   we hear that before? -ía?
Student: The “would” tense.
Teacher: Comer was to eat. How was I would eat?
Student: Comería.
Teacher: Comería. Good. Now for the line in the past, we are not adding on to the full verb. We are taking
   off our ending before we put -ía. So how would it be? I was eating, he was eating, she was eating,
   etc.?
Student: Comía.
Teacher: Comía. Vender is to sell. Vender. I would sell it. I would sell it:
Student: Lo vendería.
Teacher: Lo vendería. I was selling it. I was selling it:
Student: Lo vendía.
Teacher: Lo vendía. Good. If you want to say for sale, you can just say it sells itself. It sells itself. It’s for
   sale. How would that be?
Student: Se vende.
Teacher: Se vende. Good. For sale. Se vende. It sells itself. And if you go to a Spanish speaking place, you
   will see on houses and on cars this expression. Se vende. It was selling itself, it was for sale:
Student: Se vendía.
Teacher: Se vendía. It would be for sale. It would sell itself:
Student: Se vendería.
Teacher: Se vendería. It would sell itself. It would be for sale. Good. What was to break again? Related to
   rupture?
Student: Romper.
Teacher: Romper. Good. How would you say I was breaking it?
Student: Lo rompía.
Teacher: Lo rompía. Good. And if you just wanted to say it was breaking, and you mean by itself. It was
   breaking, not something else. How would you say it?
Student: Se rompía.
Teacher: Se rompía. Good. How would you say they were breaking?
Student: Se rompían.
Teacher: Se rompían. Good. Give me again the “to” form. To break:
Student: Romper.
Teacher: Romper. What is I would break it? I would break it:
Student: Lo rompía. Ah, lo rompería.
Teacher: Lo rompería. I would break it. How would you say I was breaking it?
Student: Lo rompía.
Teacher: Lo rompía. Good. How would you say they would break it? They would break it:
Student: Les?
Teacher: They would break is where you need to begin.
Student: Romperían. Lo romperían.
Teacher: Lo romperían. They were breaking it, they were breaking it:
Student: Lo rompían.
Teacher: Lo rompían. So, we have the same endings for would and for the line in the past for -er/-ir verbs.
   The big difference of course is that for would we are adding on to the “to” form of the verb and
   for the past we are taking off our endings first, which means we get pairs like comería, I would
   eat; comía, I was eating. Rompería, I would break; rompía, I was breaking. So how would you
   say it breaks, it breaks, and you mean it gets broken? It breaks itself in the present tense:
Student: Se rompe.
Teacher: Se rompe. How would you say it’s going to break? It’s going to break. How is we are going or
   let’s go?
Student: Vamos.
Teacher: It is going to break.
Student: Se va a romper.
Teacher: Good. Se va a romper or va a romperse. So this means it’s going to break. It’s going to get
   broken and there we are not waiting to hear what it’s going to break because we have se. So we
   completed that structure. We completed the sentence with se. The word for how in Spanish is
   cómo. If you want to ask somebody in Spanish, how do you say? - so maybe you have a Spanish
   speaking friend that speaks English. And you want to use them like a dictionary and say how do
   you say x, y, or z? What you will say in Spanish is how does it say itself? How is it said? How does
   it say itself? So this is another example of where you might be using this structure of self, which
   we are seeing in Spanish is very flexible. It’s giving us many different meanings, this structure of
   myself, yourself, ourselves, itself, this structure. So it says from decir is dice. It's a little bit
   irregular, but then the other versions follow. So we have dice for he, she, it, or usted.
   How would you say, you (informal) say?
Student: Dices.
Teacher: Good. And they:
Student: Dicen.
Teacher: Dicen. And as we know the we form tends to escape the irregularity as the accent is somewhere
   else, so we go back to decir. And to say we say:
Student: Decimos.
Teacher: Decimos. Good. So how would you say, how is it said? How does it say itself?:
Student: ¿Cómo se dice?
Teacher: ¿Cómo se dice? So you will use this often. You don’t say “¿cómo dices?” This means how do you,
   as an individual, say... how do you say it? If you want to say, how is it said, ¿Cómo se dice? How
   does it say itself?
   So se is doing quite a lot in Spanish. Sometimes we are using it to wrap up the sentence, to show
   that we are not using a verb “to” anybody or “to” anything else like in it breaks, or it transforms,
   these examples that we saw. Sometimes the se is changing the meaning like between quedar,
   remain, or be leftover and quedarse, to stay. And sometimes this se has quite a creative
   application. Se vende. It sells itself, for sale. Or, we could even have se habla. Se habla español.
   Spanish speaks itself. Spanish is spoken. Spanish spoken. Se habla español. Quedar by itself
   means to remain. And you can use this in the sense of I have one left. In Spanish, you will say it
   remains to me one. This is the structure in Spanish. I have one left. It remains to me one. So how
   would you say that? I have one left. What is the word for one?
Student: Uno.
Teacher: Uno, or una if you are talking about a feminine thing. So I have one left, it remains to me one:
Student: Me quedo un.
Teacher: That means I stay one. So there you made the reflexive structure. You said I remain myself and
   you got the meaning of to stay. But what you want is it remains to me.
Student: Me queda un.
Teacher: Me queda uno. I have one left. Me queda uno. I have two left. If me queda uno is it remains to
   me one, I have one left. How do you think you would say I have two left? The word for two is dos.
   Dos.
Student: Dos.
Teacher: Related to duo. So I have two left. They remain to me two:
Student: Me quedan dos.
Teacher: Me quedan dos. Very good. And of course we have the they form of the verb because it’s they
   remain. As I’m saying they remain to me, to me, how do you think it would be if you wanted to
   say he has two left?
Student: Le quedan dos.
Teacher: Le quedan dos. Two of them, they remain to him. Le quedan dos. He has two left or she has two
   left, or you (formal) have two left. So maybe if you go to a shop and you ask for something and
   there’s none left, maybe they will say no me quedan. I don’t have any left. No me quedan, no
   me queda, you will hear both just depending on what the person has in their mind. I have none
   left as in one. I have none left as in they’ve all gone. No me queda. No me quedan. But, we saw
   that with this verb then when we use this reflexive structure, this “self” structure, we get a different
   meaning. If I say I remain myself then I get the meaning of to stay. I stay. So how is I remain
   myself?
Student: Me quedo.
Teacher: Good. Me quedo. We remain ourselves:
Student: Nos quedamos.
Teacher: Nos quedamos. Good. He remains himself or she remains herself:
Student: Se queda.
Teacher: Se queda. They stay:
Student: Se quedan.
Teacher: Se quedan. Good. Ah, It’s all of those that begin with l - lo, la, los, las, all become se for the “self”
   version. From hablar, to speak, if you want to say I was speaking, he was speaking:
Student: Hablaba.
Teacher: Hablaba. So we have -aba as our key sound for the line in the past for -ar verbs. They were
   speaking:
Student: Hablaban.
Teacher: Good. So how do you say they were staying, they were remaining themselves?
Student: Se quedaban.
Teacher: Se quedaban. Good. They weren’t staying here:
Student: No se quedaban aquí.
Teacher: Good. I wasn’t staying here:
Student: No me quedabo, no-
Teacher: So -aba works for I, he, she, it, and you formal.
Student: No me quedaba.
Teacher: No me quedaba aquí. And we were staying here:
Student: Nos quedabamos aquí.
Teacher: The accent stays.
Student: Quedábamos.
Teacher: Nos quedábamos aquí. We weren’t staying here:
Student: No nos quedábamos aquí.
Teacher: No nos quedábamos aquí. Good. Now if you wanted to say we didn’t have any left, so here, what
   we will say is it didn’t, or they didn’t, we have the option, remain to us.
Student: No nos quedaban.
Teacher: Good. No nos quedaba or no nos quedaban. Good.
 Spanish Track 49
Teacher: To call in Spanish, so to call to somebody and also to make a phone call is llamar.
Student: Llamar.
Teacher: L-l, and we said this double l creates a /yuh/ sound in most Spanish dialects just like the y. L-l-a-
   m-a-r. Llamar.
Student: Llamar.
Teacher: Good. And we said that in Spanish you don’t tend to say my name is or I am called, you say I call
   myself to introduce yourself. So how would you say I call myself?
Student: Me llamo.
Teacher: Me llamo. Good. And if you want to ask somebody what their name is, you could say how do you
   call yourself? So let’s do this informally. How do you call yourself? What was the word for how?
Student: Cómo.
Teacher: Cómo. How do you call yourself?:
Student: ¿Cómo te llamas?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cómo te llamas? How would you say how does she call herself? What is her name?:
Student: ¿Cómo se llama?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cómo se llama? Imagine you heard her name once before and you wanted to say what
   was she called? How was she calling herself?:
Student: ¿Cómo se llamaba?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cómo se llamaba? What was her name, what was his name, or what was your name
   (formally)? What was their name, what were they calling themselves?:
Student: ¿Cómo se llamaban?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cómo se llamaban? Good. What was to have, not in the sense of haber, not the have that
   we use to go into the past, but the have that we used for possession?
Student: Tener.
  Tener. Good. And we said also that this tener is the -tain, -tain that we get inside various English
  verbs or Latin-English verbs like contain. Contain is contener. So we have this trick using tener
  that we can convert over some more verbs from English. So doing the same with obtain, we would
  get:
Student: Obtener.
Teacher: Obtener. Maintain changed a little bit. Have a go:
Student: Mentener.
Teacher: Mantener.
Student: Mantener.
Teacher: Mantener. And we said that man- actually is like from mano, hand. Sustain. And this one changed
  a little bit as well.
Student: Sostener.
Teacher: Sostener. So this -tain that we have in English is tener. To have. So how would you say I used to
  have?
Student: Tenía.
Teacher: Tenía. Good. So if you wanted to say I used to have a big house:
Student: Tenía un grande casa. Un casa grande.
Teacher: Yeah, almost, but un?
Student: Una. Una casa grande.
Teacher: Good. These bits and pieces require a little thought as well. Tenía una casa grande. We used to
  have a big house:
Student: Teníamos una grande - una casa grande.
Teacher: Good. Teníamos una casa grande. And the accent stays in the same place on the -ía. Tenía,
   teníamos. Good. I used to have four, but now I don’t have any left. I used to have four, but now I
   don’t have any left: the word for four is cuatro, cuatro.
Student: Cuatro.
Teacher: Related to:
Student: Quarter.
Teacher: Very good. So I used to have four:
Student: Tenía cuatro.
Teacher: Good. But now:
Student: Pero ahora.
Teacher: I don’t have any left. So they don’t remain me, or it doesn’t remain to me. That’s all we need to
   say to give that I don’t have any left:
Student: No me queda.
Teacher: Good. So all together. I used to have four, but now I don’t have any left:
Student: Tenía cuatro, pero ahora no me queda.
Teacher: Good. Tenía cuatro, pero ahora no me queda or pero ahora, no me quedan. You could use
   either. So, we are not using have to give this meaning we have left. How was I have in the present?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. And how did you make that I have to? I have to in the sense of I must:
Student: Que. Tengo que.
Teacher: So I have to see you, and let’s speak informally?
Student: Tengo que verte.
Teacher: Good. Tengo que verte. Now if you want to say I had to see you, you can use this line in the past
   that we learned even though in English we are saying had, not having to, this is fine in Spanish.
   So I had to see you, I was having to see you:
Student: Tenía que verte.
Teacher: Good. Tenía que verte. Good. Yesterday is ayer, a-y-e-r. Ayer.
Student: Ayer.
Teacher: Good. So I had to see you yesterday:
Student: Tenía que verte ayer.
Teacher: Good. Tenía que verte ayer. To do or to make was hacer. H-a-c-e-r. Hacer.
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Did you have to do it yesterday? Talking informally, did you have to do it yesterday?:
Student: ¿Tenías que hacerlo ayer?
Teacher: Good. ¿Tenías que hacerlo ayer? Didn’t you have to do it yesterday?:
Student: ¿No tenías que hacerlo ayer?
Teacher: Good. And you could use this like weren’t you supposed to do it? ¿No tenías que hacerlo ayer?
   Didn’t you have to do it yesterday? Weren’t you supposed to do it yesterday? Good. I want to look
   at just three irregular verbs that we have for this line in the past. Now this is a very regular tense.
   There are very few irregularities in this tense. It’s a very safe tense and the irregularities that we
   have are with very small verbs. For example, ver. How was I see, from ver?
Student: Veo.
Teacher: Veo. The same irregularity that we get in the I form in the present, veo; we get it in this line in the
   past. So instead of taking off -er and putting -o, we ended up with this extra e. So veía is I was
   seeing, I used to see, he was seeing, he used to see, she was seeing, she used to see, or you (formal).
   Veía. Give me the other versions then. We were seeing:
Student: Veíamos.
Teacher: Veíamos. They or you guys:
Student: Veían.
Teacher: Veían. You (informal):
Student: Veías.
Teacher: Good. Another irregular verb in this tense is ser. Ser. To be. Now the base for I, he, she, it, you
   (formal) is era, era. Now this is very easy to remember because we are looking at the past which
   is a line in time and then era in English is a line in time in the past. So we can just think of an era.
   We would use this with characteristic things. So for example, if you wanted to say I used to be a
   student, what was student?
Student: Estudiante.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I used to be a student?
Student: Era estudiante.
Teacher: Era estudiante. Good. We don’t need the word for a. Era estudiante. Good. Were you a student,
   informally?
Student: ¿Eras estudiante?
Teacher: Good. ¿Eras estudiante? We were students.
Student: Eramos, eramos-
Teacher: Where are you putting the accent? I couldn’t tell.
Student: I put it at the -a, at the -AMos, but it’s ERamos.
Teacher: Éramos. Good. In these tenses the accent doesn’t move around. Good, so era, éramos. Good. We
   were students:
Student: Éramos estudiantes.
Teacher: Good. What were they? What were they?:
Student: ¿Qué eran?
Teacher: Yeah, ¿Qué eran? Good. And then the last one of course, that is irregular in this tense is ir. Ir. To
   go. Now I was going is kind of like a blend of the two different ways we have of creating this past:
   -aba and -ía. I was going is iba. So you see we get a bit of -ía and a bit of -aba with ir. I was going
   from to go. Iba. So you can give me the other versions. We were going:
Student: Íbamos.
Teacher: Good. They were going:
Student: Iban.
Teacher: Good. You were going, informally:
Student: Ibas.
Teacher: Ibas. Good. Why were you going?:
Student: ¿Por qué ibas?
Teacher: Good. Now iba is very useful because, of course, you can use it like in the English I was going to
   call you, for example. I was going to go, but I didn’t have the time. I was going to do it, but I
   forgot. So you can use it in this way as well, which is very common. So how would you say I was
   going to call you, and we are talking informally? I was going to call you:
Student: Iba llamarte.
Teacher: There is something missing. Iba llamarte.
Student: Iba. I was. I was going.
Teacher: Hmm, what kind of verb is going?
Student: Iba a llamarte.
Teacher: Good. Iba a llamarte. I was going to do it:
Student: Iba hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. And I’m not sure here if you are putting the a to connect the verbs.
Student: If I did it?
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: No, I didn’t. I forgot.
Teacher: Ok, so again.
Student: Iba a hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. Iba a hacerlo. So actually in fluent speech you would hear /ibacerlo/. All of those three
   /a/’s, iba, a, hacer would blend together, so that’s why I wasn’t sure if you said it or not. We were
   going to do it or make it:
Student: Íbamos a hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. Íbamos a hacerlo. We were going to do them or we were going to make them:
Student: Íbamos a hacerlos.
Teacher: Good. Íbamos a hacerlos. Good.
Spanish Track 50
Teacher: Gracias por venir. Gracias por venir in Spanish means thanks for coming. Gracias por venir.
Student: Gracias por venir.
Teacher: So there’s two things that we can see in this sentence. We can use this sentence like a hook to
   remember two important things about Spanish. The first thing is that we have two words for for.
   We already saw another word for for. For example, how were we saying for me?
Student: Para mí.
Teacher: Para mí. Good. And for you, speaking informally:
Student: Para ti.
Teacher: Para ti. So we had mí and ti coming with prepositions. Para mí, para ti, de mí, from me, de ti,
   from you, but then for the other people we just say for he, for example. So how is for him or for he
   in Spanish?
Student: Para él.
Teacher: Good. And for her:
Student: Para ella.
Teacher: Good. So this para is when something is for somebody. No? For example, if you want to say this
   is for you, speaking informally, let’s say it’s a masculine object. This, this one, is for you. How
   would you say that?
Student: Ello-
Teacher: What is tonight?
Student: Ah, esta.
Teacher: Good. So that’s your hook and you go from there. Esta noche. But, I want a masculine thing.
Student: Esto-
Teacher: What you should do is look at somewhere that you’ve used it. So you should look at this car.
Student: Este.
Teacher: And then you find it. These are the processes that we’re learning and this is half of the method.
   You can take yourself through those processes when you need to find it. Then it comes to your
   memory. Then you know it after that. But, the first few times, you need to have a look around,
   let’s say, and seek to find it. So this or this one, masculine thing:
Student: Este.
Teacher: Este. So this one is for you (speaking informally):
Student: Este es para ti.
Teacher: Good. Este es para ti if we mean a masculine thing. What if you meant these are for you
   (masculine or mixed things)?
Student: Estos son para ti.
Teacher: Well done. Estos son para ti. So we saw that actually for this and these we have este and estos.
   In este we have the /e/ of el and in estos we have the /os/ of los. Estos son para ti. So this is the
   for that we learned until now, no? Then we have por which is much more flexible. It has many
   more meanings. Let’s investigate some of them. Por. You can use it like because of. No?
   Sometimes when we say for in English, we mean because of. For example, if you say for this
   reason. What you mean is because of this reason. So you don’t mean para, you mean por. So por
   also means for in the sense of because of. And actually in the words because and why, which were?
Student: Por qué?
Teacher: Por qué. Here in why, we see that it is because of. Por qué, why, actually means because of what.
   Because of what? And then porque as because. We said that we have the same word for why and
   because. Porque as because means because of that. So in both cases you have por, meaning
   because of. So reason in Spanish is razón. Razón.
Student: Razón.
Teacher: Or /rathón/ in most of Spain. /Rathón/. But in most of the Spanish speaking world /rasón/.
Student: Razón.
Teacher: Razón is feminine. So how would you say this reason?
Student: Esta razón.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say because of this reason, I don’t want to go? Because of this reason, I
   don’t want to go:
Student: Por esta razón, no quiero ir.
Teacher: Por esta razón, no quiero ir. Let’s contrast the two. What was to buy? Do you remember to buy?
Student: Comprer- comprer- comprar?
Teacher: Comprar. Good. Comprar. You can say I’m buying it for you. How would you say that? Let’s
   keep it informal. I’m buying it for you:
Student: Lo compro para ti.
Teacher: Good. Lo compro para ti. That means, you know, this thing I’m buying it for you. But maybe, in
   some contexts you want to say I’m buying it because of you. How would you say that?
Student: Lo compro por ti.
Teacher: Good. Lo compro por ti. So it doesn’t mean necessarily that this thing is for that person, just that
   you’ve bought it because of that person. So maybe you buy an ashtray in your house and your one
   friend that smokes comes and you say lo he comprado por ti. I have bought it because of you. If
   you say lo he comprado para ti, for you, then he’ll run to take the ashtray home. Another use for
   por is when we’re talking about time. When you are talking about periods of time, for two weeks,
   for two days, you will not say para. You will say por. This is another place where you use por.
   The word for day is día. Día.
Student: Día.
Teacher: Día. It’s actually related to an Indo-European root which just means a very old root meaning light.
   And deity in English comes from the same root. Or the ju- of Jupiter is actually also from this root.
   Jupiter means something like the father of the gods. You have -piter like paternal there and ju-
   from this same root as día and deity. And of course you have Jupiter which is the biggest planet,
   so the father of the gods, Jupiter. Día is a word that looks feminine and it’s one of those few words
   that end in -a, that look feminine, but are masculine. So the day is:
Student: El día.
Teacher: El día. And the days:
Student: Los días.
Teacher: Los días. And every day is all the days. Before we said todo el tiempo to say all the time. If you
   want to say every day, you say all the days. How do you think that would sound?
Student: Todos los días.
Teacher: Good. Todos in plural. Todos los días. Good. If you wanted to say I’m staying for three days,
   three is tres. Tres. I’m staying for three days, I remain myself for three days, so how would you
   say that? I’m staying for three days:
Student: Me quedo por tres días.
Teacher: Very good. Me quedo por tres días. I’m staying for three days. How would you say I will stay for
   three days, I will stay for three days. You don’t really need- you don’t need the will here. The fact
   that you say for three days is already some kind of a future context. The days didn’t happen yet,
   but let’s practice the future. So I will stay for three days:
Student: So it’s quedé?
Teacher: In both futures, we are adding on to the verb-
Student: Quedaré.
Teacher: Yes, we are pushing it into the future. So I will stay for three days:
Student: Me quedaré por tres días.
Teacher: Good. Me quedaré por tres días. So this sounds a little bit more certain, you know, when you use
   the future. Me quedo por tres días. I’m staying for three days. Me quedaré por tres días. I will
   stay for three days. How would you say I would stay for three days? I would stay for three days.
   A nice hook to remember would is I would like or it would please me. This is a nice hook.
Student: Me gustaría.
Teacher: So this is a nice hook to remember would, because it is something that is very common that you
   will use a lot. So what is that little bit you need for would that you can pluck out of me gustaría?
Student: The -ía ending.
Teacher: Perfect. So I would stay for three days:
Student: Me quedaría por tres días.
Teacher: Good. Me quedaría por tres días. But, I have to work. Do you remember what is to work? We
   saw it very briefly?
Student: Trabajar.
Teacher: Trabajar. Good. Trabajar is t-r-a-b-a-j-a-r and that -jar makes /har/. Trabajar. So, but I have
   to work:
Student: Pero tengo que trabajar.
Teacher: Yes, now all together. I would stay for three days, but I have to work. And not from memory, but
   thinking it through.
Student: I know because I’ve already forgotten it.
Teacher: Good. So, thinking it through again. Taking that time to think it through again. I would stay is the
   first bit:
Student: Me quedaría.
Teacher: Good. For three days:
Student: Por tres días.
Teacher: But, I have to work:
Student: Pero tengo que trabajar.
Teacher: Perfect. Me quedaría por tres días, pero tengo que trabajar. Perfect. Very good.
      Spanish Track 51
Teacher: What was I am, from estar? I am:
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: Estoy. If you want to say I’m there for you, I’m there for you, you know, in this supportive way,
   you don’t have to say there to begin with. Because we are using estar and not ser, it kind of makes
   that there a little redundant. We feel that already in estar that’s referring to states, locations and
   states, so we don’t need to say there. We can just say I’m for you, I’m for you, using estar. What
   for do you think you need?
Student: Para.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I’m there for you, talking to a friend?
Student: Estoy para ti.
Teacher: Estoy para ti. Good. To say I’m here because of you, then we are not going to use para. We don’t
   even really need to say here.
Student: If it’s still estoy it still implies location.
Teacher: It kind of just gives you the feeling. Actually, when you knock on somebody’s door and you are
   calling for them, you will just say ¿Estás? You don’t say Are you there? Or if you’re on internet,
   ¿Estás? you will write in the messenger. If you call somebody up and you want to speak to Juan,
   you will not say Is Juan there? You will just say ¿Está Juan? ¿Juan está? So, I am here because
   of you (formal):
Student: Estoy por usted.
Teacher: Good. Estoy por usted. For you (informal):
Student: Estoy por ti.
Teacher: Estoy por ti. So this would be because of you. How would you say I have come because of you, I
   have come because of you (informal). I have come because of you:
Student: Ah, the first bit is he. He venido por ti.
Teacher: He venido por ti. So whenever we want because of, we want to avoid the temptation to translate
   porque de, because of. Good. So I have come because of you, he venido por ti. You could also
   say It is because of you that we have come, for example. It is because of you that we have come.
   And of course we can make this sentence perfectly if we think it through piece by piece. So, it is
   because of you:
Student: Es por ti.
Teacher: That we have come:
Student: Que hemos venido.
Teacher: Good. Es por ti que hemos venido. It is because of you that we have come. Good. Another use of
   por – so we are seeing that por is much more flexible than para – another use of por is if you
   want to say for in the sense of exchanging this one for that one, to exchange something for
   something else, then also we use por. Cambiar, cambiar, means to change. If you want to say, I
   would change this one for that one, I would change this one for that one, and with this one and
   that one let’s refer to a masculine thing. So, I would change is the first step.
Student: Cambiaría?
Teacher: Uh-huh. This one, a masculine thing:
Student: Este.
Teacher: Good. For that one, masculine thing.
Student: Por ese.
Teacher: Good. Take away the t. Good. Cambiaría este por ese. I would change this one for that one. How
   would you say I would change these ones for those ones, masculine or mixed objects? I would
   change these ones for those ones:
Student: Cambiaría estos por esos.
Teacher: Good. Cambiaría estos por esos. Very good. What if they were feminine things?
Student: Cambiaría estas por esas.
Teacher: Good. Cambiaría estas por esas. Good. Would you change these ones for those ones? Speaking
   informally. Would you change these ones for those ones?, still feminine things:
Student: ¿Cambiarías estas por esas?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cambiarías estas por esas? Wouldn’t you change these ones for those ones?, still
   feminine:
Student: ¿No cambiarías estas por esas?
Teacher: Good. Go on…
Student: ¿Por qué no cambiaría estas por esas?
Teacher: Still think it through though.
Student: Sorry, ¿Por qué no cambiarías estas por esas?
Teacher: Good. We don’t want to stop thinking. You will be able to relax that as you go on, but at the
   beginning you want to be very insistent on your thinking so you install correct structural habits or
   grammatical habits. We don’t really use much grammatical terminology, but everything we’re
   seeing here is grammar, of course. It’s all structure. Ah, something I should mention is that if
   you’re chatting online, if you’re practicing your Spanish online you might see por written as an x
   as a shortcut. Because por is also what you use in, like, times tables. Ocho por ocho is eight times
   eight. So you might see gracias por venir as gracias x venir. And if you have the habit of writing
   kisses with an x this can be very confusing to Spanish speakers. So gracias por venir reminds us,
   this nice hook, that we will hear a lot, gracias por venir, reminds us that we have two words for
   for. Para, something being for you, quite literally, and then por, which is much more flexible in
   meaning. The other thing that we learn from the sentence gracias por venir is that after
   prepositions, so these little group of words, we’ve seen - para, por, de, en, con, a, we’ve seen
   quite a few of them - following these words in English we put -ing. Thank you for coming. But in
   Spanish we just put the “to” form. Gracias por venir. So how would you say thank you for calling,
   thank you for calling - if you forget call you can think of what’s your name? or how are you called?
   because it’s something that people tend to have heard somewhere.
Student: Gracias por llamar.
Teacher: Good. Gracias por llamar. And if you wanted to say thanks for calling me you could say that as
  well.
Student: Gracias por llamarme.
Teacher: Good. Gracias por llamarme. So after prepositions we don’t use the -ing. We want to resist any
  temptation to put the -ing form after the preposition. This is negative language transfer, things that
  are not the same between English and Spanish. What was I am from estar?
Student: Estoy.
Teacher: Estoy. And you remember how to say tired in Spanish?
Student: Cansado.
Teacher: Good. Cansado. So how do you say I am tired?
Student: Estoy cansado.
Teacher: But you being a female?
Student: Cansada.
Teacher: Good. Estoy cansada. So if you want to say I’m tired of – dancing, cooking, cleaning – it’s all
  going to be with the “to” form. What was to work?
Student: Trabajar.
Teacher: Trabajar. How would you say I’m tired of working?
Student: Estoy cansada de trabajar.
Teacher: Yes. Estoy cansada de trabajar. Good. For one of the pasts that we saw, for the line in the past,
  so when we’re referring to like a period of time in the past, for –ar verbs we have the -aba base
  ending. So how would you say I was from estar?
Student: Estaba.
Teacher: Estaba. I was tired of working:
Student: Estaba cansada de trabajar.
Teacher: Estaba cansada de trabajar. Good. I was tired of working. Good. We were tired of working, and
   let’s be a masculine or a mixed group. We were tired of working:
Student: Estábamos cansados de trabajar.
Teacher: Very good. Estábamos cansados de trabajar. Good. If you want to say something like it’s a way
   of doing it, it’s a way of doing it, the word for way is form, a form of doing it, and how do you
   think form might be in Spanish if you had to guess it?
Student: Forma.
Teacher: Yes. Forma. Good. So how would you say a way of doing it? What was to do or to make?
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: It is a way of doing it:
Student: Es una forma de hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. Es una forma de hacerlo. Good. I don’t believe in arguing like this, in this way. I don’t
   believe in arguing in this way. So, to believe is creer, creer and it has two e's, c-r-e-e-r, creer.
Student: Creer.
Teacher: So how do you say I don’t believe?
Student: No creo.
Teacher: No creo. What was creation?
Student: Creación.
Teacher: And what was to create?
Student: Crear.
Teacher: And what was I create?
Student: Creo.
Teacher: Yes. So we get this situation occasionally in Spanish that the “I” form of two different verbs will
   look the same. Creo, of course, could be from creer, to believe, or from crear, to create. So, I
   don’t believe:
Student: No creo.
Teacher: In arguing. So to argue in Spanish you can use to discuss. This is the most common verb, actually,
   that’s used for argue. Discuss is discutir, discutir.
Student: So what do they use for discuss?
Teacher: Hablar, mostly, but you can use discutir as well for discuss, but it has a heavy connotation mostly.
   No? I mean, if you argue with your boyfriend or your girlfriend you use discutir, you say this.
   Argüir, which is argue, means to argue a point, rather than to get in an argument. Discutir is more
   like to get in an argument. So it’s what we can call a false friend, words that look like they are the
   same, but they have a difference in meaning, and there are a few of them. We need to watch out
   for them between English and Spanish. Another example would be actual, which doesn’t mean
   actual, it means current, no? Mi trabajo actual, my current job. Actualmente means currently,
   at the moment, rather than actually. Mostly the vocabulary, the Latin English that we turn into
   Spanish, is very reliable, but there are a few words that we want to watch out for. Discutir is one
   of them. This doesn’t really mean to discuss as much as it does to argue. So, I don’t believe in
   arguing:
Student: No creo en discutir.
Teacher: Good. In this way, we will say of this way rather than in this way.
Student: De esta forma.
Teacher: Good. So all together, I don’t believe in arguing, in discussing, in this way:
Student: No creo en discutir de esta forma.
Teacher: Good. No creo en discutir de esta forma. Good. So with this sentence, gracias por venir, we are
   reminded how we have two words for for, por and para, and we need to have a think and decide
   which one we think is most appropriate before we translate for. And that after prepositions we
   don’t need to worry about making the -ing form of the verb, we just use the “to” form.
Spanish Track 52
Teacher: Para, this for, para, can also mean in order to, in order to. So in a sentence, for example, We have
   spoken in order to resolve it. We have spoken in order to resolve it. Now in English we could just
   say We have spoken to resolve it, no? We don’t need to say in order to. But whenever we have this
   to meaning in order to, we want to translate this as para in Spanish. So let’s make this sentence.
   First bit is We have spoken. We have spoken:
Student: Hemos hablado.
Teacher: Hemos hablado. To resolve it – in order to resolve it. Now, to resolve is resolver. Ah? The same
   word, resolver. So We have spoken in order to resolve it:
Student: Hemos hablado para resolverlo.
Teacher: Good. Hemos hablado para resolverlo. Good. So whilst the to of to resolve, resolver, would fit
   nicely here, I mean if we were to translate directly from English, We have spoken to resolve it, it
   doesn’t work in Spanish. Whenever this to means in order to, we must put that para. Hemos
   hablado para resolverlo. You could say We have spoken in order to try to resolve it. What was
   to try? Related to intention:
Student: Intentar.
Teacher: Good. We have spoken in order to try to resolve it:
Student: Hemos hablado para intentar resolvar– resolverlo.
Teacher: Good. Hemos hablado para intentar resolverlo. So only when the to implies in order to we want
   to put para. The “to” form of the verb in Spanish is not enough to include that meaning. We must
   put para. So for example, if you want to say I’m here to see you, does it mean I’m here in order
   to see you?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Good. So I am here to see you (informally):
Student: Estoy aquí para verte.
Teacher: Good. Estoy aquí para verte. This is also something we could learn or interiorize through the
   negative language transfer that some Spanish speakers make when they speak English. For
   example, you might hear a Spanish speaker say I am here for see you or for seeing you. You might
   hear a Spanish speaker, especially with basic English, making this mistake. Now once you’ve
   heard that a few times, you would say, “Oh, maybe this is how you say it in Spanish.” So we don’t
   want to forget this opportunity, the opportunity to learn from the negative language transfer, the
   mistakes that Spanish speakers make in English, which originate from Spanish. Once you hear the
   same mistake a few times, you can assume it probably comes from Spanish. I have called you in
   order to speak about it: so the first bit is I have called you, I have phoned, I have called
   (informally):
Student: He llamado. Ah, sorry. Te he llamado.
Teacher: In order to speak about it:
Student: Para hablarlo.
Teacher: Good.
Student: We don’t use about.
Teacher: No. Good. Te he llamado para hablarlo. So if we take the sentence in English, I have called you
   to speak about it, and we translate it directly, then we will say Te he llamado hablarlo. But when
   our to means in order to, we must put this para. Te he llamado para hablarlo. I have called you
   in order to speak about it. Good. What was to be, for states?
Student: Estar.
Teacher: Estar. And we said that we can use this to express when we are doing something right now. We
   can say, instead of I eat, como, I am eating, using this structure with estar and then the -ing form
   of the verb. Do you remember how you would get the -ing form of comer, for example? Of –er or
   –ir verbs?
Student: Comiendo?
Teacher: Comiendo.
Student: Comiendo.
Teacher: Good. Comiendo. So we add on -iendo for –er/-ir verbs and for –ar verbs we add on?
Student: -ando.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I am eating?
Student: Estoy comiendo.
Teacher: Estoy comiendo. And this means right now, no? I am speaking:
Student: Estoy hablando.
Teacher: Estoy hablando. I am explaining it: to explain – we would go from explanation but explanation
  is an exception. It’s not “explanación” in Spanish as we might hope, it’s explicación. And we see
  we even have that /k/ sound in explain, explicación, we have it in English as well in inexplicable,
  for example we say in English. Inexplicable in Spanish. So we can see where that sound’s coming
  from. So how is explanation or explication in Spanish?
Student: Explicación.
Teacher: Good. And to explain:
Student: Explicar.
Teacher: Explicar. Good. So I’m explaining it and you mean right now?
Student: Estoy explicándolo.
Teacher: Estoy explicándolo. Lo estoy explicando. The lo can go on the end of a “to” form, but it can also
  go on the end of one of these -ando or -iendo forms as well. So you have the option. Lo estoy
  explicando. Estoy explicándolo. And you mean right now. Actually in explicar, we get
  this -plicar from “plicare“ that we mentioned before, meaning to fold in Latin. So explicar, to
  explain, to unfold. You might want to say I’m taking a Spanish course. Even if you’re not in the
  course right now in this moment, when we are taking a course, in our minds there’s a period of
  time in which we are taking a course and when we say it we’re in that period of time. If I say I’m
  taking a Spanish course, maybe I mean for three months and I’m in that period. Do you remember
  what to take was? We used it with to take a photo. Tomar.
Student: Tomar.
Teacher: Tomar. So tomar is to take. So I am taking:
Student: Estoy tomando.
Teacher: Good. Estoy tomando. A course: I’m going to let you guess it.
Student: Una corsa?
Teacher: Close. It’s not with a, it’s with o.
Student: Un corso.
Teacher: Un curso, with a u. Un curso. Good. Of Spanish, this is how you would say a Spanish course, a
   course of Spanish.
Student: Un curso de español.
Teacher: Very good. Estoy tomando un curso de español. Good. Now, what if we put this estoy in the
   past tense that we learnt? The past tense that is -aba or -ía. I was taking a Spanish course:
Student: Estar, estaba.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Estaba tomando un curso de español.
Teacher: Good. Estaba tomando un curso de español. Which means we actually have two ways of saying
   I was taking. We can say estaba tomando or we can just use tomar and use that line in the past.
   How would that sound?
Student: Tomaba.
Teacher: Yes. So both tomaba and estaba tomando mean I was taking. So you have that option. Estaba
   tomando un curso de español or tomaba un curso de español. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. How would you say I was eating?
Student: Comía.
Teacher: Comía. Or? How else could you say it?
Student: Estaba comiendo.
Teacher: So you have this option. Comía or estaba comiendo. Most of the time they’re interchangeable,
   sometimes one might fit slightly better than the other and it’s something you will pick up very
   naturally when you’re practicing. So if in one situation people tend to use estaba comiendo rather
   than comía, you will pick it up. So we have -ando and -iendo to form this -ing. And we saw in
   Spanish that we don’t use it after prepositions. You don’t use this -ing either if you say something
   like swimming is healthy or running is healthy. You don’t use the -ing there either. You will just
   say to run is healthy, to swim is healthy. If you hear people toast in Spanish you might hear them
   say salud, which means health. Healthy is saludable. To dance is healthy:
Student: Bailar es saludable.
Teacher: Good. Bailar es saludable. Good. To swim is nadar. Nadar. To swim is healthy:
Student: Nadar es saludable.
Teacher: Nadar es saludable. So we’re seeing that we don’t use the -ing in Spanish as much as we do in
   English. Sometimes in English we make an adjective with -ing. We go from to interest to
   interesting. When we do this in English, this -ing that we use in English to form an adjective, in
   Spanish it’s -ante for –ar verbs and -iente for –er/-ir verbs. So for example, we have to interest,
   what was to interest?
Student: Interesar.
Teacher: Good. Interesar. So if you get rid of -ar and you put -ante, you get that -ing adjective, interesting.
   So how would you say interesting?
Student: Interesante.
Teacher: Interesante. Good. So when you make an adjective with -ing in English from the verb, you can
   just replace it with -ante or -iente. How would you say to irritate in Spanish? And you can go from
   irritation:
Student: Irritación. Irritar.
Teacher: Irritar. So if you want to say irritating:
Student: Irritante.
Teacher: Irritante. It is irritating:
Student: Es irritante.
Teacher: Good. Es irritante. Good. How would you say to frustrate in Spanish?
Student: Ah, frustration. Frustación. Frustar.
Teacher: Frustrar.
Student: Frustrar.
Teacher: Yes, because you have the two r's, no? Frustrate. Frustrate, Frustrar. Frustrating:
Student: Frustrante.
Teacher: Frustrante. Good. To wane, to wane, to reduce in size, in Spanish this is menguar. Menguar.
Student: Menguar.
Teacher: When the moon gets smaller, it’s waning. And the moon is la luna.
Student: La luna.
Teacher: La luna. So how would you say the waning moon?
Student: La luna menguante.
Teacher: Good. So there we’re making waning like an adjective, not like the verb, not menguando. Ah?
   Menguante, la luna menguante. Luna is an interesting word. I don’t know if you ever noticed,
   like, in English Monday is “moon day”. It’s not very obvious in English that the days of the week
   relate back to the planets. But in Spanish it’s very obvious. You have la luna, the moon, and then
   you have lunes, Monday. Tuesday is martes. And Mars is marte, planeta marte. Wednesday in
   Spanish is miércoles. What planet does that sound like?
Student: Mercury.
Teacher: Yes. Jueves in Spanish is spelt with a j:
Student: Jupiter.
Teacher: Jupiter. Viernes is Friday:
Student: Venus.
Teacher: Venus. So you can see much clearer there how our days of the week are named after planets. To
   live was vivir. V-i-v-i-r. So vivir is to live.
Student: Vivir.
Teacher: Good. We have two “to be”s, we have estar for states, and for characteristics we have?
Student: Ser.
Teacher: Ser. And we said that un ser, un ser, means a being, that we can use ser like a noun and we get a
   being. So a human being is?
Student: Un ser humano.
Teacher: Un ser humano. You could also say a living being, a living being:
Student: Un ser vivir.
Teacher: How do you get this –
Student: Vivo.
Teacher: You could say un ser vivo. Vivo is also like an adjective, which means alive. But living is adjective
   that we make with -ing. We can build it from vivir. For –ar verbs we have -ante and for –er/-ir
   verbs we have -iente.
Student: Un ser viviente.
Teacher: Good. Un ser viviente. A living being. What was to go out or to leave?
Student: Voy?
Teacher: To go out or to leave. So it’s “to”. I don’t care if it’s wrong, but I want it to end in r.
Student: Ah, salir. Salir.
Teacher: Salir. Now we have in English, you might have heard, salient, which means kind of protruding or
   outstanding, or something that stands out or sticks out or protrudes. This is a Latin-English version
   of this -ante/-iente rule. So we can see it even in English. How would salient be in Spanish? You
   can go from salient or you can go from salir.
Student: Saliente.
Teacher: Saliente. Good.
  Spanish Track 53
Teacher: What was to be able, can, in the “to” form?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Poder. So we have poder. If we want to make could, we have two different could's. We have the
   could that refers to the past, I couldn't do it yesterday. And we have a could that refers to the future:
   but I could do it tomorrow. This future could - we learned it already from to be able, would be
   able: poder, “podería” and the e fell out podría. If we want to say I could in the past, most of the
   time we will probably find ourselves using this line past that we learned. The past that we make
   with -aba for -ar verbs and -ía for -er/-ir verbs. So how would you say I could, referring to past?
   I could, I was able to:
Student: Podía.
Teacher: Podía. So this is I was able to, I could. The past could, podía. We could:
Student: Podíamos.
Teacher: Good. I couldn't do it because I didn't have the time. For both of these we can use that line in the
   past, that ongoing past, even though we're not using it in English. I couldn't do it because I didn't
   have the time. So the first bit is I couldn't do it:
Student: No podía hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. No podía hacerlo. Because:
Student: Porque.
Teacher: I didn't have the time:
Student: No tenía el tiempo.
Teacher: Good. No podía hacerlo porque no tenía el tiempo. So we're going to contrast much more how
   we use this line and this dot in the past when we look at that dot. So what we're seeing for now -
   even though we haven't looked at the dot yet - that the decisions that we need to make in Spanish
   about whether we will use this line in the past, this ongoing past, or this dot, this point in the past,
   is a decision based on context rather than identifying which one we're using in English and then
   translating it. So we can begin to look at that even before we've learned the dot in the past.
   The word for yesterday was ayer. Ayer.
Student: Ayer.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say, I couldn't do it yesterday?
Student: No podía hacerlo ayer.
Teacher: Good. No podía hacerlo ayer. And when we learn the dot form of the past, we will see that we
   could have used that one as well. Sometimes they're interchangeable. Sometimes this dot and this
   line form are not interchangeable. For example, if we want to use haber to say I had eaten rather
   than I have eaten, I had gone already, rather than I have gone, then we always use the line in the
   past. Always. So from haber, how do you say I had?
Student: Había.
Teacher: Había, good. So if you want to say I had eaten, how would you say it?
Student: Would you say, “había comer”?
Teacher: You have a version of the verb that comes after haber, no matter what version of haber we have,
   había, habría, he, it doesn't matter.
Student: Comido. Había comido.
Teacher: Good. Había comido. The word for already in Spanish is ya. Y-a. Ya.
Student: Ya.
Teacher: And it tends to go at the beginning. That would be the least emphatic place, the most natural place.
   So how would you say I had eaten already?
Student: Ya había comido.
Teacher: Good. Ya había comido. So you could say, he wanted to dine with me, but I had dined already.
   So, he wanted, what is to want?
Student: Querer.
Teacher: Querer. So, he wanted. Again we're using the line in the past, because even though in English
   there we are using the dot - we're not saying he was wanting, he used to want - with querer we
   can use the line without any problem because most of the time, when you want something, it's not
   just for an instant, it's kind of an ongoing feeling. The dinner was la cena. What was to dine, or to
   have dinner?
Student: Cenar?
Teacher: Yes. He wanted to dine with me:
Student: Quería cenar con mí?
Teacher: And this was a bit of an exception. You do not say “con mí”, you say:
Student: Ah, conmigo.
Teacher: Good. Quería cenar conmigo, but I had already had dinner. I had dined already:
Student: Pero ya había cenado.
Teacher: Good. But if you say, quería cenar conmigo, pero ya había cenado, I might understand he wanted
   to dine with me, but he had dined already, no? Because we have the same verb form, so how would
   we make that clearer?
Student: Just saying yo at some point.
Teacher: Exactly. But where? So give it to me again, and we can say the word for he as well, especially
   when we are contrasting between two people, we will have the habit of putting who. So, he wanted
   to dine with me, but I had dined already:
Student: Él quería cenar conmigo pero yo ya había... so dined, cenaría, no.
Teacher: No.
Student: Cenía.
Teacher: What you want to translate is not dined. You want to find the version after haber. This is going to
   save you a lot of pain.
Student: Cenado.
Teacher: Good. He wanted to have dinner with me but I had already had dinner. Él quería cenar conmigo
   pero yo ya había cenado. Now we don't need to look at or discuss when we use had as opposed
   to when we use have, when we use I had lost it as opposed to I have lost it, because it's exactly the
   same in Spanish as it is in English. So you will just translate the thought, let's say. For example,
   you might want to say, he was looking for it because I had lost it. He was looking for it because I
   had lost it. To look for is buscar, buscar, to look for.
Student: Buscar.
Teacher: Good. Buscar, to look for. So, he was looking for it, he was searching for it:
Student: Buscía.
Teacher: Check the ending first.
Student: Buscaba.
Teacher: Good. He was looking for it:
Student: Lo buscaba.
Teacher: To lose was?
Student: Perder.
Teacher: Because I had lost it:
Student: Porque yo lo había perdido.
Teacher: Good. Lo buscaba, or él lo buscaba, porque yo lo había perdido. Good. How would you say, I
   would have lost it - so not I had lost it, I would have lost it?
Student: Lo habería perdido.
Teacher: Good. I would have lost it. Lo habría perdido. Now I'm not sure if you said habría or “habería”
   because this irregularity that we have which is habría happens so naturally because that e kind of
   falls out so naturally. I think you said “habería”, but you kind of didn't pronounce the e well. Is
   that right?
Student: I meant to say “habería”.
Teacher: Yes. So you see that naturally it's happening, that e of haber is falling away, and that has been
  formalised in Spanish. You write it like this, h-a-b-r-i-a. Habría. Only with a few verbs, this
  contraction is occurring. Habría. Lo habría perdido. I would have lost it. How would you say, I
  would have got lost, or I would have lost myself?
Student: Me habría perdido.
Teacher: Good. Me habría perdido. Good.
 Spanish Track 54
Teacher: Now, these versions of the verb that we get after haber, and we said that it’s any version of haber,
   whether it’s he, whether it’s había, whether it’s habría, we could even say I will have. I will have
   lost it – lo habré perdido. Any version of haber - we will have the -ado, -ido version after it, even
   if it’s in the “to” form – we could say something like I would like to have gone. I would like to
   have gone. I would like, it would please me:
Student: Me gustaría.
Teacher: To have gone.
Student: Haber ido.
Teacher: Me gustaría haber ido, it would please me to have gone, I would like to have gone, me gustaría
   haber ido. So, even after the “to” form we’re having just one version of the verb that can come
   after haber. Now, this version of the verb that can come after haber is very useful, because, if it
   makes sense, we can use it as an adjective, just as we can in English. For example, in English we
   say: I have sold. And sold we can use like an adjective, we can say it is sold. We say I have lost.
   And we can use it like an adjective – I am lost. And you can do the same in Spanish, which gives
   you hundreds and hundreds of words now that you can access as adjectives. So, for example, to
   close is cerrar. Cerrar.
Student: Cerrar.
Teacher: How would you say: I have closed it? I have closed it:
Student: Lo he cerrado.
Teacher: Good. Lo he cerrado. You might be referring to the door, which is la puerta. So, if you were
   referring to the door, how would you say that? I have closed it:
Student: La he cerrado.
Teacher: Good. La he cerrado. Good. So cerrado – we can take that and we can use it as an adjective.
   Now, it doesn’t change ever after haber – it’s always cerrado: lo he cerrado, la he cerrado, lo
   hemos cerrado. But, when it’s an adjective, when it’s behaving like an adjective, then of course,
   it can change. So, if you say it is closed and you mean the door, how would you say it?
Student: Cerrada.
Teacher: Good, so how would you say that, it is closed?
Student: Es cerrada.
Teacher: You think to be closed is a state or a characteristic?
Student: Está cerrada.
Teacher: Está cerrada. In fact, the great majority, with just a couple of exceptions, of these adjectives that
   we get from -ado, -ido, that we get from the version that comes after haber, go with estar. With
   this particular type of adjective we don’t need to really think about whether it’s a state or a
   characteristic, they are just gonna go with estar, with a couple of exceptions. To lose was:
Student: Perder.
Teacher: What is the version that comes after haber, after any form of haber? Perder becomes:
Student: Perdido.
Teacher: Perdido. So, how would you say: I am lost?
Student: Estoy perdido, or female, perdida.
Teacher: Good. Estoy perdido, or for feminine, perdida. Good. What was to finish or to terminate?
Student: Terminar.
Teacher: Terminar. How would you say: I have finished?
Student: He terminado.
Teacher: Good. He terminado. So now you can also say it is finished, and use it like an adjective.
Student: Está terminado.
Teacher: Good. Está terminado. What if you were referring to the movie, which is la película:
Student: Está terminada.
Teacher: Good. Está terminada. Good. So, this gives us a lot of adjectives we can access. Let’s have a look
   at some of them. To sell was vender, and then sold would be:
Student: Vendido.
Teacher: Good. They are sold:
Student: Están vendidos.
Teacher: Están vendidos. And if we mean las casas, how will it sound?
Student: Están vendidas.
Teacher: Good. Están vendidas. Good. Some of the adjectives that we already met are actually adjectives
   that were formed in this way. How was the word for tired?
Student: Cansado.
Teacher: Cansado. And this comes from the verb cansar, to tire. So cansar is to tire, and then cansado is
   the version that you get after haber, and it’s the adjective, cansado, tired. So, if you want to say I
   get tired, I tire myself, so now it’s present:
Student: Me canso.
Teacher: Me canso. That means I get tired or even I get fed up. How would you say I have tired myself?
   And like I said, it doesn’t literally mean that you are responsible for tiring yourself, it just means
   that you’ve got tired or you can use it like “I’ve had enough”. So, I have tired myself:
Student: He- Me he cansado.
Teacher: Good. Me he cansado. I’ve gotten tired, I’ve gotten fed up. Good. And then cansado - which is
   the version of cansar after haber - is also, of course, the adjective tired. I am tired:
Student: Estoy cansada.
Teacher: Good. So, to close is cerrar, and we said that closed is cerrado. And we said that these –ado, -ido
   adjectives, with a couple of exceptions, go with estar. So, how would you say it is closed?
Student: Está cerrado.
Teacher: Good. How would you say he is closed to the idea - idea is the same word in Spanish. He is closed
   to the idea:
Student: Está cerrado a el idea?
Teacher: What gender does it look like: idea?
Student: La idea.
Teacher: Está cerrado a la idea. He is closed to the idea. But if you want to say he is a closed person, you
   mean as a person he is closed, how do you think you would say it?
Student: Es un person cerrado?
Teacher: Almost. This is exactly the structure that we want, well done. But, the word for person is feminine,
   it doesn’t refer to anybody specifically, just the word itself is feminine.
Student: Es una persona cerrado- cerrada.
Teacher: Good. Cerrada refers to person. Very good. Es una persona cerrada. So that’s how we can get
   around that, if we want to say he is closed and we mean he is a closed person. If we just say es
   cerrado it sounds like a mistake. But es una persona cerrada is fine, because es is going with
   persona, what you are saying essentially is he is a person that is closed. Es una persona cerrada.
   How would you say she is lost?
Student: Está perdida.
Teacher: Good. Está perdida, she is lost. But if you want to say She is lost, you know, as a person, she’s
   lost her way:
Student: Es una persona perdida. Well, actually, why not está here?
Teacher: In this structure you are saying she is a person, you are not looking at lost person, you are looking
   at person. The adjective is totally secondary. So when you say this is a chair you are going to use
   ser. If you are going to say it’s a wet chair, even thought that is a state, you are still going to use
   ser. Because what you are saying is it’s a chair, the adjective is secondary. But, if you say it is
   wet, then you use estar. So, chair or seat is silla. Silla.
Student: Silla.
Teacher: Good. Mojar, mojar means to wet. Mojar. Now, how do you think you say wet as an adjective?
Student: Mojada.
Teacher: Good. For silla, mojada. Feminine. Good. So, how would you say the chair, la silla, the chair is
   wet?
Student: La silla está mojada.
Teacher: Good. La silla está mojada. But, if you say it is a wet chair, you are just saying it is a chair, and
   then an adjective is secondary, and the fact that it is a chair is about as characteristic as it gets.
   So, you are saying it is a chair:
Student: Es una silla.
Teacher: Wet:
Student: Mojada.
Teacher: Es una silla mojada. So, when we say something is a noun, when we give it its name, there’s
   nothing more characteristic. Es una persona, it is a person; it is a happy person, es una persona
   feliz. It’s a chair, es una silla; it’s a wet chair, es una silla mojada. The structure there is it is a
   chair, the adjective is secondary. But, when we say the chair is wet, then we are talking about a
   state of the chair with is: la silla está mojada. Good.
 Spanish Track 55
Teacher: What was the to have, that we use to go in the past?
Student: Haber.
Teacher: Haber. Good. How would you say I have cancelled? I have cancelled:
Student: He cancelado.
Teacher: Good. He cancelado. And we said that the version of the verb that you get after haber – you can
   use it like an adjective as well in Spanish, just as we do in English. For example in English we
   could say it’s cancelled. We use the same version, cancelled, that comes after haber. So we can
   do the same in Spanish. So, how would you say it is cancelled, and I remind you that the adjectives
   that we form in this way tend to go with estar, only with a few exceptions that are more flexible.
   So it is cancelled:
Student: Está cancelado.
Teacher: Está cancelado. What if we meant la fiesta, the party?
Student: Está cancelada.
Teacher: Good. Está cancelada. Fiesta, by the way is actually related to festival, festivity, we can see the e
   splitting between festival and fiesta. To complicate in Spanish, what’s complication?
Student: Complicación, complicar.
Teacher: Complicar, “with folding”, complicar. Good. If you want to say it has got complicated, it has got
   complicated, how do you think you will say it?
Student: Se ha complicado.
Teacher: Good. Se ha complicado. It has got complicated. It has complicated itself, we would say. Very
   good. So, the adjective complicated is:
Student: Complicado.
Teacher: Complicado. Good. So, you can say: It is complicated:
Student: Es complicado.
Teacher: Es complicado. Or?
Student: Está complicado.
Teacher: Está complicado. Actually, with this one you can use either; there tends to be a tendency to go
  with estar with these types of adjectives, but with complicado you could say either. Es
  complicado, está complicado, depending on what you were talking about, you might feel more
  drawn to one or to the other, but most of the time they are going to be interchangeable here. We
  can also make structures like should have, could have with this haber. Let’s start with should have.
  Now should, we take it from the verb to owe, which also we use like must, and it’s related to
  English debt.
Student: Deber.
Teacher: Deber. Deber. Good. So, deber is to owe or must. And if you say would owe you get should. So,
  how would you say I should?
Student: Debería.
Teacher: Good. So now we can say I should have canceled, and this have is to have. I should to have
  canceled:
Student: Debería haber cancelado.
Teacher: Very good. I should have canceled. Debería haber cancelado. I should have canceled it:
Student: Lo debería haber cancelado.
Teacher: Very good. Lo debería haber cancelado. Where else could that lo go there?
Student: It’s after the unchanged verb, so debería haberlo cancelado.
Teacher: Yeah, debería haberlo cancelado. Very good. What was could? So, we take to be able and we
  say would be able to get this could, this could that refers to future. So, what is to be able, related
  to power?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Poder. Good. So how would you say I would be able or I could?
Student: Podería.
Teacher: Okay,
Student: Podría.
Teacher: Podría. So, you could say something like I could have gone. I could have gone. What was to go?
Student: Ir.
Teacher: Ir. And what was gone, the version of to go after haber?
Student: Ido.
Teacher: I could have gone:
Student: Podría haber ido.
Teacher: Podría haber ido. We could have gone. We could have gone:
Student: Podríamos haber ido.
Teacher: Good. Podríamos haber ido. Good. So, after haber, any version of haber, whether it’s the “to”
   form, haber, whether it’s habría, any version of haber, it’s going to have –ado or –ido with the
   following verb. But some verbs are irregular and they don’t form their version after haber in this
   way. So, to break, related to rupture in English, was romper. Now, this after haber is not
   “rompido”, “rompido” doesn’t exist, it’s irregular, after haber it’s roto: r-o-t-o, roto. So, how
   would you say I have broken it?
Student: Lo he roto.
Teacher: Good. Lo he roto. I have broken them:
Student: Los he roto.
Teacher: Good. Los he roto. What if you want to say it has broken? It has broken:
Student: Se ha roto.
Teacher: Se ha roto. It has broken itself. It has broken. Very good. If you had just said ha roto I would
   understand he, she, it or you (formal) has or have broken, and I would be waiting to hear what was
   broken. So, we have roto instead of “rompido”, let’s say. Roto is the version of romper after
   haber, which means it will also count for the adjective. So, if you want to say it is broken, how
   would you say it?
Student: Está roto.
Teacher: Está roto. And if it was a feminine thing?
Student: Está rota.
Teacher: Está rota. To die is morir, morir.
Student: Morir.
Teacher: And the version after haber is not “morido”, it’s muerto, muerto. How would you say he has
   died?
Student: Ha muerto.
Teacher: Ha muerto. And with morir you can hear it with se or without se, there is not really a lot of
   difference, sometimes the se doesn’t actually make a lot of difference - ha muerto, se ha muerto
   - you hear both. Now, if you want to say he is dead, how do you think you would say it?
Student: You mean as if it’s estar or ser?
Teacher: We know that this type of adjective tends to go with:
Student: Well, estar, but I could see why this specific one could also go with ser under certain
   circumstances.
Teacher: Yes, but it doesn’t, it never goes with ser. So, some of these adjectives we form in this way can go
   with ser, but this one can’t. So, firstly, how would that be, he is dead?
Student: Está muerto.
Teacher: Está muerto. So, complicated, for example, could go with ser and estar, but muerto can’t. Maybe
   it’s not just because they are this type of adjective, that dead will go with estar, maybe it is about
   the way Spanish perceives the world. To be dead is a state, that the soul goes through, let’s say,
   you don’t know what is the perception behind that, or, if it’s just going with estar because it’s one
   of these adjectives. So, they are interesting points to think about, and thinking about those points
   helps your memory, even if you are just looking out of interest and not coming to any conclusions.
   How would you say I’m dead (and you can use this to mean tired)? This is quite common in
   Spanish, if you are really tired, you can say oh, I’m dead.
Student: Estoy muerta.
Teacher: Yes, feminine. Estoy muerta. Good. You can say also I die myself here, like morirse, in all
   different kinds of circumstances, when something’s really funny, when you can’t believe
   something, in many different circumstances you could use that, you will hear it around, but let’s
   build it, let’s see how it would sound. So, to die, morir, I die myself, making this reflexive
   structure, how would it sound?
Student: It’s irregular so the “mue” is going to come in. Muero, maybe? Muero?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Me muero.
Teacher: Me muero. Good. Me muero. So, you will hear this all the time actually in Spanish, ay, me
   muero, maybe from embarrassment, maybe from laughter, maybe from disbelief, it’s a common
   thing – me muero. To open in Spanish is abrir, abrir.
Student: Abrir.
Teacher: Abrir. And if you want to say I have opened it, you say lo he abierto. So we don’t have “abrido”
   after haber, we have abierto. Another irregular one. Lo he abierto.
Student: Is it with an h?
Teacher: No, good question though, good that you are thinking about that. Abrir is a-b-r-i-r. Abrir becomes
   abierto. So, how would you say it is open?
Student: Está abierto.
Teacher: Good. Está abierto. How would you say they are open?
Student: Están abierto.
Teacher: Están,
Student: Están abiertos.
Teacher: Good. Están abiertos. Decir and hacer, to say or to tell, decir, and to make or to do, hacer, also
   are irregular after haber. These two verbs are quite irregular in most places, we will pay them a
   little more attention later. So decir, to say or to tell, and hacer, to do and to make, are irregular
   after haber. Decir becomes dicho, dicho, and hacer becomes hecho; which is why they are nice
   to see together, because they both have this /ch/ sound. Decir becomes dicho, and hacer becomes
   hecho. So, how would you say I have said it? I have said it:
Student: Lo he dicho.
Teacher: Good. Lo he dicho. And what if you wanted to say I have told him?
Student: Lo he dicho.
Teacher: But what we want here is not him; what want here is to him. I have told to him:
Student: Le he dicho.
Teacher: Good. Le he dicho. Good. We have told him:
Student: Le hemos dicho.
Teacher: Good. Le hemos dicho. Good. Interestingly, dicho is also a noun. We said that some version of
   the verb can form the noun; sometimes it’s the “to” form, sometimes it’s the “I” form, sometimes
   it’s the “he, she, it” form. Here it’s this form. Un dicho is a saying, a saying. Hacer after haber
   becomes hecho. So, how would you say I have done it or I have made it?
Student: Lo he hecho.
Teacher: Good. Lo he hecho. I should have done it. I should have done it. I should:
Student: Debería.
Teacher: I should have done it:
Student: Debería haberlo hecho?
Teacher: Yes! Debería haberlo hecho. Of course we can put the lo there because we have haber in the “to”
  form. Debería haberlo hecho or lo debería haber hecho. Very good. You should have done it
  (informally):
Student: Deberías haberlo hecho.
Teacher: Good. Deberías haberlo hecho. How would you say it is done? It is done:
Student: Está hecho.
Teacher: Good. Está hecho. You might also see this used like hecho en China, made in China, or hecho
  en España, made in Spain, you will see this on products, should be a nice reminder. So, hecho as
  an adjective, made or done, está hecho, it is done, it is made; but, it can also be a noun: un hecho,
  un hecho is a fact, and it’s actually connected to the word fact, even though they look so different.
  There is in Spanish and English what we can call a kind of grey area between h’s and f’s, because
  in a phonetic change that occurred in Spanish many f’s became silent h’s, just as hecho is from
  hacer, fact is from to do, so “faire”, like in French, if you know some French, is to do, and fact is
  related to “faire”, just as hecho is related to hacer. And we can find some other connections
  between this f and this silent h, between English and Spanish. For example in English we have
  fable, a fable is a story, and a story is spoken, and from there we see the relation with hablar.
  Fable, hablar. We have fugitive, which is the same root as huir, h-u-i-r, huir, which means to
  escape or to run away in Spanish. We have hermano or hermana in Spanish, brother or sister,
  spelled h-e-r-m-a-n-o, or with an a on the end for hermana, and there we see the connection with
  fraternal. Hembra, which means female, h-e-m-b-r-a. Even within Spanish you can see this
  phenomenon of the h’s and the f’s. For example you have iron which is hierro, h-i-e-r-r-o, hierro,
  iron, and then you get ferrocarril, which means railways, so they look totally unrelated, but if you
  know that the f became the silent h and that the e split into ie you can see the connection between
  hierro and ferrocarril. You have profundo, profundo, profound, in Spanish, as you do in
  English, and then you have hondo, which means deep, so hondo is the “fundo” bit of profundo,
  but with some changes, hondo, h-o-n-d-o to mean deep. Fumar means to smoke. And then humo,
  h-u-m-o, is smoke, like a noun, el humo, the smoke. So there are some interesting things we can
  find between English and Spanish and within Spanish itself with these f’s and h’s. Also you can
  look out for some connections with other letters, you will find other pairs of letters like this, for
example w’s and g’s – you get war in English and guerra in Spanish, William in English and
Guillermo in Spanish. So this is an interesting thing to keep an eye out for to make connections
between vocabulary and, of course, in this way aid your memory.
 Spanish Track 56
Teacher: We’ve seen quite a few prepositions up until now, these words that refer to movement or position
  or direction. For example, we had two words for for, what were they?
Student: Para and por.
Teacher: Good. Para and por. And how did we say from or of?
Student: De.
Teacher: De. With:
Student: Con.
Teacher: Con. In or on:
Student: En.
Teacher: En. Good, so we’ve seen quite a few of those. Now, prepositions in Spanish won’t come at the end
  of the sentence, as they can in English. We’ve seen this already as well. Do you remember how to
  say Where are you from? You are (speaking informally) from ser is eres. Eres. So, how would
  you say Where are you from?:
Student: ¿De dónde eres?
Teacher: ¿De dónde eres? So, in English Where are you from? We’re putting the preposition at the end of
  the sentence, and that’s fine in English, but it’s incorrect Spanish. So, you don’t say Where are
  you from? You say From where are you? ¿De dónde eres? If we want to say Where are you
  going? in Spanish, we say To where are you going? What was You are going (speaking
  informally)?
Student: Vas.
Teacher: Vas. Good, so, to where are you going?:
Student: ¿A dónde vas?
Teacher: ¿A dónde vas? Good. We are going to the United States. The United States is Estados Unidos,
   United States, Estados Unidos, and I should mention, you don’t translate the word for the, you
   just say we are going to United States.
Student: Vamos a Estados Unidos.
Teacher: Vamos a Estados Unidos. We discussed the concept before about working backwards. So, instead
   of building up to say what we want to say, finding bits of language and working backwards to find
   the “to” form of the verb. So, for example, imagine we looked up somewhere United States, or we
   asked somebody how to say United States, and we came across Estados Unidos. We can use
   Unidos to work backwards to work out what is the verb to unite. How do you think that is?
Student: Unidar?
Teacher: Not guessing, but really working backwards, which, instead of building up, building down; instead
   of adding bits on to the verb, seeing what has been added and consciously taking it off.
Student: So, -ido has been added, when you add –ido you take off the ending of the “to” form.
Teacher: And what is the ending with –ido?
Student: -ir.
Teacher: Or?
Student: -er.
Teacher: You should experiment and see which one feels more natural to you. Now, the one that you may
   have heard before is probably going to feel more natural even if you didn’t register it, so if you
   heard before the correct version, it’s going to feel more natural, and also, the more words you learn
   in Spanish the greater intuition you get about the phonetics of Spanish, what sounds more Spanish.
   So, that should direct you when you say “Uner, Unir, Uner, Unir”, to understand which one is to
   unite. Which one do you think it is?
Student: Somehow I think that it’s unir.
Teacher: Unir. But, at this stage there is no reason for you to know what sounds more Spanish; this intuition
   is something that occurs with practice and exposure and listening. But working backwards is a
   useful skill that we want to employ in our language-learning journey. So, we said that prepositions
   won’t come at the end, so if we say, for example, the girl I work with, in Spanish we will say the
   girl with which, with that, with who, I work. We have the option. So what was to work, do you
   remember?
Student: Trabajo.
Teacher: To-
Student: Trabajar.
Teacher: Trabajar, to work. Good. The girl is la chica, la chica, it’s kind of informal, but very common.
   La chica. How do you think the guy would be if the girl is la chica?
Student: El chico?
Teacher: El chico. So, we can begin with the one that we know already, which is with that, con que. The
   girl with that I work:
Student: La chica con que yo trabajo.
Teacher: La chica con que trabajo, you don’t need the yo unless you are emphasizing, la chica con que
   yo trabajo. We could also say with which, la chica con cual trabajo, we could say with who, la
   chica con quien trabajo. We could even put la que or la cual, which means which or that, but
   we are showing that it’s a feminine which or a feminine that, la chica con la cual trabajo, la chica
   con la que trabajo. You have all of those options in Spanish, but don’t worry about them, you
   can just use que. So, whilst you have all of those options and you will hear them, and when you
   get comfortable with hearing them and understanding them you will start using the different ones
   without really thinking about it very much; you don’t want to worry about it now, que you can use
   for everything, for all of that. La chica con que trabajo.
Student: So, it’s correct?
Teacher: Yeah, it’s correct Spanish. But you have all of those options: la chica con cual trabajo; la chica
   con la cual trabajo, la chica con la que trabajo, la chica con quien trabajo. The girl that I was
   working with. So, how would you say it is the girl I was working with? Let’s go for it slowly.
   It is the girl:
Student: Es la chica.
Teacher: With who:
Student: Con que.
Teacher: Con que. I was working, I used to work:
Student: So, it’s trabajar, and that becomes –aba, trabajaba.
Teacher: Good, all together, it’s the girl I was working with:
Student: Es la chica con que trabajaba.
Teacher: Es la chica con que trabajaba. How would you say the girl with whom, the girl that I was going
    to the party with. The girl with whom, or with that, with which, all of those are okay in Spanish.
Student: La chica con que-
Teacher: La chica con que, I was going to the party. So, I was going is the line version of ir, which is
   irregular, but we can remember that it takes a little bit from the two options that we have to make
   the line version. We have –aba for –ar verbs and –ía for –er/-ir verbs; and the verb ir kind of
   blended together –aba and –ía and came up with:
Student: Iba.
Teacher: So, you can think of it that way: you can think of it like –aba and –ía kind of blending together, to
   have iba, or you can think of it like the present va, but with an i before. In the past it’s spelled with
   a b: i-b-a, iba, where in the present it’s spelled with a v, v-a, but as we know they are very similar
   sounding, so it’s like the present with an i before. So, in the present you have he is going, él va, or
   él /ba/, and then in the past, él iba. So I was going, he was going, she was going, it was going, you
   (formal) were going is:
Student: Iba.
Teacher: Iba. So, the girl with which I was going to the party:
Student: La chica con que iba a la fiesta.
Teacher: Good. La chica con que iba a la fiesta. So, you can say la chica con la cual, la chica con quien,
   la chica con la que – you have all of these options. Let’s use cual in a sentence, which is the word
   for which, and it’s not just a which like this to connect the girl with which, you can also use it like
   a question: which one do you want? You probably can guess, we don’t need the word for one.
Student: ¿Cuál quieres?
Teacher: Good. Which one do you want? ¿Cuál quieres? Good. So cuál, cuál, c-u-a-l, means which. I know,
   from saber, to know, was sé; we said it’s very irregular, just s-e, I know.
Student: Sé.
Teacher: Good. How would you say I don’t know which one he wants?
Student: No sé cual quiere.
Teacher: Good. No sé cual quiere. How would you say I don’t know which one he wants to see?
Student: No sé cual quiere ver.
Teacher: No sé cual quiere ver. Good. Now, what if you wanted to say I don’t know with which one he
   wants to do it, I don’t know which one he wants to do it with:
Student: No sé con cual quiere hacer- it with?
Teacher: Well, you said the with already.
Student: Lo!
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: So, it’s just lo at the end?
Teacher: Yeah, and you might feel this temptation often to repeat the preposition again at the end, even if
   you put it before, because that English is pushing through with the negative language transfer. No
   sé con cual quiere hacerlo, I don’t know with which one he wants to do it, I don’t know which
   one he wants to do it with. So, we don’t put the preposition at the end of the sentence in Spanish,
   we will rearrange the sentence and whilst this sounds more formal in English, of course it doesn’t
   sound more formal in Spanish, it’s just the only correct option. The word for who, we’ve mentioned
   very briefly is quién, quién.
Student: Quién.
Teacher: Good. If you want to say who is going?, what verb version will who go with? Who is who? Is it
   you, is it them, is it he/she/it? Who is who?
Student: He/she/it.
Teacher: Good. So, how would you say who is going?:
Student: ¿Quién va?
Teacher: ¿Quién va? Good. And in Spanish you have the plural of who, if you are expecting more than one
   person, if you know that your who refers to more than one person, you can put quien into plural,
   so, how do you think that would sound?
Student: Quienes?
Teacher: Yeah. Quienes. So if you want to say who is going? And you know it’s more than one person?
Student: ¿Quiénes van?
Teacher: Good, and you changed the verb as well to match. ¿Quiénes van? Good. How would you say:
   Who is here?:
Student: ¿Quién es aquí?
Teacher: You know-
Student: Está!
Teacher: Yes, it’s your location.
Student: ¿Quién está aquí?
Teacher: Good. ¿Quién está aquí? And if you knew you were talking about here, you could just leave that
   out as we have the sense of location with estar, we don’t really need to say the here, if we know
   that we are talking about here. Like we said before, if you knock on someone’s door you just say
   ¿Estás? Because we are using estar, and we are talking about states, that’s enough context for us
   if we just leave it by itself to understand that we are speaking about location. So, you could just
   say who is?
Student: ¿Quién está?
Teacher: ¿Quién está? I don’t know with who I have to do it. I don’t know who I have to do it with. How is
   I have to, what have do we use to get the meaning of have to?
Student: Tengo- tener.
Teacher: Tener. Tener, to have. I have:
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Good, and to get the meaning of I have to:
Student: Tengo que.
Teacher: Tengo que. So, I don’t know who I have to do it with, I don’t know with who I have to do it:
Student: No sé con quien tengo que hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. No sé con quien tengo que hacerlo. Or if you knew we meant more than one person, no sé
   con quienes tengo que hacerlo. Good. How would you say I don’t know who I have to do it for,
   I don’t know for who I have to do it:
Student: No sé para quien tengo que hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. No sé para quien lo tengo que hacer or no sé para quién tengo que hacerlo. Good. What
   if you wanted to say I don’t know who I have to do it because of, I don’t know who I have to do it
   because of, so how would that sound?
Student: No sé por quien tengo que hacerlo.
Teacher: No sé por quien lo tengo que hacer, no sé por quien tengo que hacerlo.
Spanish Track 57
Teacher: What is to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. -ar verb, and to eat:
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. -er verb, and to live:
Student: Vivir.
Teacher: Vivir. -ir verb. Good, so there we have an –ar, -er and –ir verb, and we saw –ar verbs form one
   group, and –er/-ir verbs form another group. But, we have one time in the entire Spanish language,
   where there is a difference between –er and –ir verbs, otherwise they are always forming one
   group. But just one occasion in the whole Spanish language, where there is a difference between
   them. How do you say we speak or we are speaking?
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. How would you say we eat or we are eating?
Student: Comemos.
Teacher: Comemos. Good, and how is we live?
Student: Vivimos.
Teacher: Vivimos. Good. So, for -er verbs we use -emos for we in the present, and for -ir verbs we use -imos
   for we in the present. But of course for the other versions they are using the same endings, for
   example, he eats is:
Student: Come.
Teacher: Come. We use /e/. He lives:
Student: Vive.
Teacher: Vive. Again we are using an e. They eat, or you guys eat:
Student: Comen.
Teacher: Good. They live or you guys live:
Student: Viven.
Teacher: Viven. Where do you guys live?:
Student: ¿Dónde viven?
Teacher: ¿Dónde viven? Very good. What was the word for it? Not eat, but it, i-t:
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. Good. There’s a couple of interesting and useful things we can do with lo, it, in Spanish, which
   we can’t do in English. For example, when you want to say the interesting thing, the complicated
   thing is, the interesting thing is, the difficult thing about that is, instead of saying the word for
   thing, in Spanish you can just say, for example, lo interesante. Lo interesante means the
   interesting thing. So, you get the structure the interesting thing with lo interesante. So, how would
   you say, for example, the interesting thing is that they live here? The interesting thing is that they
   live here:
Student: Lo interesante es que viven aquí.
Teacher: Very good. Lo interesante es que viven aquí. Very good. How would you say the interesting
   thing is that they live together? Now, the word for together in Spanish is junto, junto.
Student: Junto.
Teacher: This is the singular masculine version. J-u-n-t-o. Now, it’s related to junction, it doesn’t sound like
   it, but when you realize that junto is with j, then you can see how it’s related to junction in English
   and join. The interesting thing is that they live together:
Student: Lo interesante es que viven junto?
Teacher: Good, but it’s them, no? They, viven:
Student: Juntos.
Teacher: Good. Lo interesante es que viven juntos. Or, if they were two females, you would say:
Student: Juntas.
Teacher: Good. Lo interesante es que viven juntas. The interesting thing is that they live together. What
   do you think fácil means? Fácil:
Student: Easy.
Teacher: Easy. Why?
Student: Facilitate.
Teacher: Facilitate. Good. To facilitate is to make easy, so, we have fácil, easy. So, if you wanted to say the
   easy thing, how would you say that?
Student: Lo fácil.
Teacher: Lo fácil, and then you will carry on, so we can say the easy thing is that they come together. The
   easy thing is that they come together:
Student: Lo fácil es que, venir is irregular, right?
Teacher: Try and build it, see what happens, go there first and then see.
Student: It’s not “vieno”, no it’s vengo.
Teacher: But you are going for the “they” version, so don’t go from venir to “I” version to “they” version.
Student: But I might as well remember it.
Teacher: Why? That’s how you get lost, right? What you want to do is focus your thoughts on just what you
   have in front of you, which is going from venir to the “they” form, and try to build it as it should
   be, and then when you get that result, then have a look at maybe if it’s irregular, if it doesn’t feel
   right -
Student: So, is it vienen?
Teacher: Of course! You see?
Student: Yeah. The “I” one though! My mind is trying to remember.
Teacher: Vengo. But it’s not important, if you don’t need it now it shouldn’t be important for you, because
   with everything you will remember, you will remember something similar that you don’t
   remember. If you let that occupy your thoughts then you are gonna block. You need to be
   comfortable with a level of uncertainty to learn a language. If you want to have the whole panorama
   of the whole language before you start speaking, you will never start speaking. And sooner or later
   we are gonna come across again that thought that distracted us cause we are gonna want to say it,
   and in that moment we will sort it out. So, the more we do that, the more you are gonna control
   this panorama of Spanish, that makes you a little bit insecure right now, because you know so
   much and you feel like it’s all floating around. The easy thing is that they come together:
Student: Lo fácil es que vienen juntos.
Teacher: Good. Lo fácil es que vienen juntos. Very good. How would you say the complicated thing is
   that they come together:
Student: Complicación – complicar – complicado?
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: So, lo complicado es que vienen juntos.
Teacher: Lo complicado es que vienen juntos. Good. So we can say lo bueno, the good thing; lo malo,
   the bad thing. Malo is bad, like in malnutritioned, that means badly nutritioned, so that’s a useful
   structure. Before we said de esta forma, in this way, de esta forma. We could also say de esta
   manera, in this manner, but very very common in Spanish when we want to say like this, like that,
   is the word así, a-s-i, así.
Student: Así.
Teacher: Así means like this or like that. So, if you want to say something like we don’t speak like this, we
   don’t speak in that way, you don’t really need to say de esa manera or de esa forma, you can just
   take this wonderful shortcut for like this or like that, which is así. So, like this, like that, así.
   So, we don’t speak like that, we don’t speak in that way:
Student: No hablamos así.
Teacher: No hablamos así. We don’t eat like that:
Student: No comemos así.
Teacher: No comemos así. We don’t live like that:
Student: No vivimos así.
Teacher: No vivimos así. Good. Another interesting thing that we can do with lo, a useful structure we can
   make with lo, is lo de. The combination of lo and de means like the thing about. So we see how
   lo can sometimes replace thing, lo interesante, the interesting thing, and lo de is like the thing
   about. So, for example, if you wanted to say the thing about the party, you just say lo de la fiesta.
   So if you want to say we are speaking about the thing about the party - not we are speaking about
   the party, but we are speaking about that issue of the party, that thing we know what we are
   referring to, we are speaking about that business about the party, hablamos lo de la fiesta. Or
   hablamos sobre, about, you could say that as well, hablamos sobre lo de la fiesta. You can even
   say de, we speak of, hablamos de lo de la fiesta. You can say that business about Juan, that thing
   about Juan, how would you say that?
Student: Lo de Juan.
Teacher: Lo de Juan. Good. So, you could say I don’t want to speak about Juan’s business like this, I don’t
   want to speak about Juan’s business like this. And for Juan’s business you will just say:
Student: Lo de Juan.
Teacher: Good. So, I don’t want to speak about Juan’s business like this:
Student: No quiero hablar de lo de Juan así.
Teacher: Good. No quiero hablar de lo de Juan así. Or we could say no quiero hablar sobre lo de Juan
   así, or just no quiero hablar lo de Juan así. So, lo de we kinda wanna see as a unit, meaning that
   thing about. And we’ve seen already that de can mean about, so it’s just it about, that thing about.
   It’s used very often in Spanish and you will find it very useful. So, you could say, for example, I
   want to organize that thing tomorrow. That thing tomorrow, that thing about tomorrow. I want to
   organize, what’s to organize?
Student: Organizar.
Teacher: Good. So, I want to organize that thing about tomorrow:
Student: Quiero organizar lo de la mañana?
Teacher: La mañana is the morning.
Student: Oh, sorry, tomorrow.
Teacher: Yes, so morning and tomorrow are the same word in Spanish, mañana. If you say la mañana we
   are going to understand the morning.
Student: So it’s just mañana.
Teacher: Good, so all together:
Student: Quiero organizar lo de mañana.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero organizar lo de mañana. It about tomorrow, the thing about tomorrow.
   Quiero organizar lo de mañana. But I don’t want to organize it like this, but I don’t want to
   organize it like this:
Student: Pero no quiero organizarlo así.
Teacher: Good. Pero no quiero organizarlo así. Good. But I don't want to organize it like this. Or, if you
   wanted to be more emphatic, you could replace así with de esta manera, de esta forma, of this
   way, of this form, but así is the most common, you will be hearing it all the time.
 Spanish Track 58
Teacher: We have one more time in Spanish to learn, one more verb time, and that’s the point in the past.
   The one that usually we would express with -ed in English: wanted, walked, or, you know, the
   irregular versions: ran, ate. This is the point in the past and it’s much more random than the other
   tenses that we looked at. The point in the past is a little bit more messy, but we will find some
   logic in it, just not the same one that we’ve been seeing until now. So, we will practice with hablar
   for –ar verbs and with comer for –er/-ir verbs, and we will use these verbs as our hooks that we
   can look back to when we need to remember one of these endings. So, I spoke, I spoke, is hablé,
   hablé.
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Can you tell me what I did there then to get I spoke from to speak, from hablar?
Student: You took off the –ar ending and added an /e/.
Teacher: Good. Anything else?
Student: Well, the accent is on the /e/.
Teacher: Perfect. Hablé. Good. So, that’s I spoke. And he/she/it or you (formal) spoke is habló, habló.
Student: Habló.
Teacher: Good. And what did I do there to get habló from hablar?
Student: You took off the –ar and you put an o.
Teacher: Okay, and what else?
Student: The accent is on the o.
Teacher: Good. So, remember when we said how important the accent was in the present, because if you
   stress HA-blo, I speak, if you stress it wrong we said that we will get this version in the past,
   ha-BLÓ, he/she/it and you (formal) spoke. What was I didn’t speak:
Student: No habló.
Teacher: I
Student: Ah, sorry, no hablé.
Teacher: No hablé. And that might happen to you often, because we have such strong connection between
  /o/ and I, but in this point in the past it’s /e/. No hablé. And he didn’t speak or she didn’t speak or
  you (formal) didn’t speak:
Student: No habló.
Teacher: No habló. Good. What was to buy?
Student: Comprir, comprar.
Teacher: Good, comprar. So if you come up with “comprir”, for example, and it doesn’t feel right, you can
  just run a little check and change the ending: “comprir”, “comprer”, comprar, and the one that
  you heard before is going to be the one that jumps out at you: comprar. So, how would you say I
  bought?
Student: Compré.
Teacher: Compré. And I bought it:
Student: Lo compré.
Teacher: Lo compré. I didn’t buy it:
Student: No lo compré.
Teacher: Good. No lo compré. He bought it:
Student: Lo compró.
Teacher: Lo compró. He bought it for me:
Student: Me lo compró.
Teacher: Good, we don’t need the for. Very good. Me lo compró. We could use the for, if we wanted, if we
  wanted to emphasize or stress that it’s for me, so, how would that be?
Student: Lo compró para mi.
Teacher: Good. Lo compró para mi. To send in Spanish is enviar.
Student: Enviar.
Teacher: So we have envoy from this in English.
Student: Envelope.
Teacher: Is that from there?
Student: Must be-
Teacher: Or is it from envelop, like to encapsulate, you have encapsulate, envelop. But, like I said we don’t
   need to know when we consider these things, just considering it helps us remember that word and
   if you are particularly curious there are, I mean, to check, there are some very good online free
   resources, for example, etymonline.com, is an excellent free etymological dictionary, where you
   can check any word you have a curiosity for. So enviar, to send. I sent:
Student: Envié.
Teacher: Exactly. I sent it:
Student: Lo envié.
Teacher: I sent it to you, speaking informally:
Student: Te lo envié.
Teacher: Good. I didn’t send it to you:
Student: No te lo envié.
Teacher: Good. No te lo envié. The word for still or yet, the same word in Spanish, still or yet, is todavía,
   todavía.
Student: Todavía.
Teacher: Which is actually the combination of todo, here toda, in feminine, meaning all, and vía, like via
   in English, is a way, so it’s “all the way”. But of course no Spanish speaker hears that, when they
   hear todavía, just like when we say expressions like as well, we don’t think that that’s built of as
   and well. So, the words, sometimes the small words we build these bigger words out of in English
   and in Spanish, don’t make much sense to us most of the time, but for a learner it’s useful for you
   to divide a word like todavía, because it’s long and you might find it difficult to remember, and if
   you identify that it’s toda and vía, even if that doesn’t really make any sense with the meaning of
   yet and still, it’s gonna help you internalize that vocabulary. So, yet or still:
Student: Todavía.
Teacher: Todavía. I didn’t send it to you yet, still speaking informally:
Student: No te lo envié todavía.
Teacher: Good. No te lo envié todavía. Good. What was he sent or she sent or you (formal) sent, it sent?
Student: Envió.
Teacher: Good. Envió. Yesterday, the word for yesterday was ayer, a-y-e-r.
Student: Ayer.
Teacher: Good. So, how would you say he sent it yesterday?
Student: Lo envió ayer.
Teacher: Good. Lo envió ayer. He sent it yesterday, she sent it yesterday, you (formal) sent it yesterday. If
   you want to say it was sent yesterday, this kind of structure in English where we don’t say who
   did it, we just say it was sent yesterday, how do you think you might say that in Spanish?
Student: Se lo envié, no-
Teacher: Think first, the structure in English, what you will say in Spanish, but in English.
Student: It sent itself.
Teacher: Exactly. It sent itself. So what is it sent?
Student: Envió.
Teacher: Okay, It sent itself:
Student: Se envió.
Teacher: Yes, and you are dying to put the lo there, right?
Student: Yes!
Teacher: So, this is the intuition because you have it sent in your mind, but if you don’t succumb to that
  intuition and you work mechanically it sent, envió, it sent itself, se envió, okay, then you don’t get
  lo, because you don’t need it. So, it sent itself yesterday, it was sent yesterday:
Student: Se envió ayer.
Teacher: Good. Se envió ayer. Good. Again, what was to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Good, and I spoke:
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Good, and he spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: He spoke with me:
Student: Habló conmigo.
Teacher: Good. Habló conmigo. I don’t know why he didn’t speak with me. I don’t know why he didn’t
  speak with me. So, the first bit is I don’t know why:
Student: No sé por qué.
Teacher: He didn’t speak with me:
Student: No habló conmigo.
Teacher: Good. No sé por qué no habló conmigo. To forget is olvidar, olvidar.
Student: Olvidar.
Teacher: That means to forget. And the noun, olvido, we don’t have it in English, I don’t think. The
  forgetting, el olvido, the process, like the experience of forgetting, I don’t think we have a word
  like this in English, and you will hear it a lot in songs especially in Spanish, especially tango, if
  you listen to tangos, they speak about falling in love and forgetting, not ever falling out of love,
  only el olvido. Olvidar, to forget. How would you say I forgot?
Student: Olvidé.
Teacher: And he forgot:
Student: Olvidó.
Teacher: I was going to do it, but I forgot it. I was going to do it, but I forgot it. So, the first bit is I was
   going, this is your line in the past, and it’s one of the three irregular verbs that we have in the line
   of the past.
Student: Iba.
Teacher: Iba. So, I was going to do it:
Student: Lo iba a hacer.
Teacher: But I forgot it:
Student: Pero lo olvidé.
Teacher: Good. Lo iba a hacer pero lo olvidé. Good.
 Spanish Track 59
Teacher: So, for –ar verbs we have /e/ for I: hablar - to speak, hablé – I spoke, and /o/ for he/she/it/you
   formal and we are accenting our endings - hablé, habló. For –er/-ir verbs we have an /i/ sound, so
   an i, an i, for I, and /ió/, i-o, for he/she/it. So we have /i/ and /ió/. So, if you go to comer – to eat,
   I ate is comí, and he ate/she ate/it ate/you (formal) ate is comió. We are accenting the endings
   again, the i and the o. Comí, comió.
Student: Comí, comió.
Teacher: Good. What was salir? Salir:
Student: To leave?
Teacher: To leave or to go out. So, how would you say I went out or I left?
Student: Salí.
Teacher: Salí. She went out, she left:
Student: Salió.
Teacher: Salió. Good. She didn’t go out yet, she didn’t leave yet:
Student: No salió todavía.
Teacher: Good. No salió todavía. I don’t know why she didn’t leave yet. I don’t know why she didn’t leave
   yet:
Student: No sé por qué no salió todavía.
Teacher: Good. No sé por qué no salió todavía. What did qué mean? Qué, what does that mean?
Student: What.
Teacher: Yes, what, and what else does it mean?
Student: That.
Teacher: That. In, like, I hope that, espero que, good. So, apart from what and that, que also means than,
   than. So, you can use it like this, so you could say, for example, I ate more than him. I ate is the
   first bit:
Student: Comé?
Teacher: -er/-ir verb.
Student: Comí.
Teacher: Good. I ate more than him:
Student: Comí más que él.
Teacher: Good. Not him, than he. More than he ate. Comí más que él – I ate more than him, or more than
   he ate. Good. He ate more than me:
Student: Comió más que … and I’m not sure if it’s “mi” or “migo”.
Teacher: When we said comí más que él, we put él there because whilst in English we say him, what we
   really mean is he. I ate more than he ate. It’s quite peculiar in English, that we say him and not he,
   so in Spanish we are being more literal: comí más que él – I ate more than he. So, he ate more
   than me - Comió más que:
Student: Yo.
Teacher: Exactly. So, he ate more than I, he ate more than I ate. So, how would that be?
Student: Comió más que yo.
Teacher: Good. Comió más que yo. It’s actually quite peculiar in English that we say me. In fact, the way
   we use words like me instead of I is really peculiar in English, and it’s a negative language transfer,
   that could influence other languages that you are learning. For example, if I say who wants to go
   to the park, you might say me! This doesn’t make any sense. It’s I, I want to go to the park, what
   is this me? So, there is some strange use of these words in English that might influence our Spanish,
   so we need to cut that negative language transfer when we identify it popping up. So, comió más
   que yo, he ate more than I, he ate more than I ate. What was to see?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Ver. Good. I saw? Ver is regular here, so I saw. So, go back to comer, use that as your hook.
Student: Vi.
Teacher: Good. I saw him:
Student: Lo vi.
Teacher: Good. Lo vi. I didn’t see him:
Student: No lo vi.
Teacher: No lo vi. I saw him, but he didn’t see me. And, as we are contrasting we will probably use one or
   both of the words for I and he, those words we don’t need to use, we will probably use one or both
   of them here as we’re contrasting, although you don’t need to, so it’s up to you. I saw him, but he
   didn’t see me. First bit is I saw him:
Student: Lo vi.
Teacher: But, he didn’t see me:
Student: Pero no me vio.
Teacher: Good. Lo vi, pero no me vio. And like I said, as we are contrasting we might feel an urge to say
   the word for él: lo vi, pero él no me vio or yo lo vi, pero él no me vio, depends on the context,
   even if you have context and you know who you are talking about, you might feel yourself wanting
   to say these words because you are contrasting. The word for nothing, nothing, in Spanish is nada,
   nada.
Student: Nada.
Teacher: N-a-d-a, nada.
Student: Nada.
Teacher: And we have double negative in Spanish, which means you can say I didn’t see nothing:
Student: No vi nada.
Teacher: Good. No vi nada. I didn’t eat anything:
Student: No comí nada.
Teacher: No comí nada. Didn’t you eat anything (speaking formally)? Didn’t you eat anything?:
Student: ¿No comió nada?
Teacher: ¿No comió nada? Why didn’t you eat anything?:
Student: ¿Por qué no comió nada?
Teacher: ¿Por qué no comió nada? Good. The word for nobody is nadie.
Student: Nadie.
Teacher: N-a-d-i-e, nadie.
Student: Nadie.
Teacher: Nobody saw anything, nobody saw nothing:
Student: Nadie vio nada.
Teacher: Good. Nadie vio nada. Good. Nobody saw anything. Durar, durar, means to last. Durar.
Student: Durar.
Teacher: We have endure in English.
Student: Duration?
Teacher: Duration, and you even get like corporate names, that use these Latin roots and kind of appeal to
   your understanding without you realizing that you understand it. So, for example, you have
   Duracell batteries, you know what that means, but you don’t know why you know what it means,
   so you can identify this kind of use of Latin in industry and how it’s appealing to your subconscious
   understanding of the message that they want to give you about the products. So, look out for that.
   So, durar, to last. Minute in Spanish is minuto. So, how would you say it lasted two minutes? It
   lasted two minutes:
Student: Duró dos minutos.
Teacher: Very good. Duró dos minutos. I lasted two minutes:
Student: Duré dos minutos.
Teacher: Good. Duré dos minutos. We looked at before how you can get this -ing adjective. So, the
   adjective that we have for -ing, like interesting, using -ante or -iente. So, interesting was
   interesante. So, during is not an adjective, but it’s formed in the same way, so how do you think
   you say during in Spanish?
Student: Durante?
Teacher: Yes, durante. So you could say during two minutes:
Student: Durante dos minutos.
Teacher: Good. And you can use that like for, as well. So, we said that with time you can say por dos
   minutos, but you can also say durante, you will hear that as well in Spanish, durante dos
   minutos, during two minutes, for two minutes. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. Good. And he ate:
Student: Comió.
Teacher: Comió. How would you say he ate for half an hour, or he ate during half an hour - half an hour
   is media, half, and what was hour?
Student: Hora.
Teacher: Hora, like in ahora. Media hora. Good. So, he ate during half an hour, he ate for half an hour:
Student: Comió durante media hora.
Teacher: Good. Comió durante media hora. He spoke during half an hour, for half an hour:
Student: Habló durante media hora.
Teacher: Habló durante media hora. What was with in Spanish?
Student: Con.
Teacher: Con. Without in Spanish is sin. S-i-n, sin.
Student: Sin.
Teacher: Sin. And to stop, to stop, is parar, parar. P-a-r-a-r, parar.
Student: Parar.
Teacher: So you could say he spoke for half an hour without stopping. He spoke for half an hour without
   stopping:
Student: Habló durante media hora sin parar.
Teacher: Good. Habló durante media hora sin parar. And we said that after prepositions, so sin is a
   preposition, we are not saying stoppING, we are saying to stop – sin parar, “without to stop”.
   Habló durante media hora sin parar. Parar is interesting, because par, par, in Spanish means
   pair, so un par is a pair. So, like a pair of shoes, un par de zapatos, un par de zapatos. So,
   parar, to stop, might be “the pairing”, you can imagine this kind of time and space notion of two
   things pairing, reaching each other and then stopping. And then comparar, to compare, is “with
   pairing”. So, even though this is an m here, it’s con, the n has been softened by that p, which is
   why we say compare. So, “with pairing” is to compare. Prepare, of course, is “pre-pairing”, we
   can see this in English as well. Repair, to repair is to “re-pair”, to pair up again. Separar is to
   separate in Spanish, separation, separación, separar; and this se- means apart, so to separate is
   to “pair apart”, to “pair apart”.
Spanish Track 60
Teacher: What was to speak in Spanish?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. I spoke:
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Hablé. And he spoke/she spoke/you (formal) spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: Habló. Good. We spoke is hablamos, which, I’m sure you’ve noticed, is exactly the same as the
  present, we speak. So, hablamos means we speak or we spoke, which, for one side is wonderful
  because it means you get another version of this very irregular tense without having to remember
  a new one. But, of course, it can cause some ambiguity, and in real life it can cause some ambiguity,
  not often, mind, because most of the time you have some context showing that you are talking
  about the past. For example, the word for when is cuando.
Student: Cuando.
Teacher: So, if you want to say when we speak I understand everything, what was to understand?
Student: Comprender.
Teacher: Comprender. So, when we speak, I understand everything:
Student: Cuando hablamos, comprendo todo.
Teacher: Good. Cuando hablamos, comprendo todo. So, cuando hablamos, that bit could be when we
  speak, generally, or when we spoke, so that second half brings us into the context and we
  understand that when we speak, generally speaking, I understand everything. Cuando hablamos,
  comprendo todo. But, if you wanted to say when we spoke I understood everything, then, of
  course, the first bit is going to be the same, but that second bit, I understood everything, is going
  to give you that context. So, let’s practice that one - when we spoke I understood everything:
Student: Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo.
Teacher: Very good. Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo. So again, the second part of that sentence is
  making it clear whether this hablamos is the present or the past. Cuando hablamos, comprendo
  todo; cuando hablamos, comprendí todo. We spoke yesterday. We spoke yesterday:
Student: Hablamos ayer.
Teacher: Hablamos ayer. Good. And we know that we can use the present with future context in Spanish.
  So, if you wanted to say we will speak tomorrow:
Student: Hablamos mañana.
Teacher: Hablamos mañana. So, hablamos ayer, we spoke yesterday; hablamos mañana, we will speak
   tomorrow. How would you say we wait a lot, we wait a lot, generally? What is a lot in Spanish?
Student: Mucho.
Teacher: Good. To wait or to hope:
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: Esperar. If you forget this one you can think of desperate, which means “un-hoped”. Desesperado
  in Spanish, again one of these -ado/-ido adjectives from the version that comes after haber. You
  can see desesperar – desesperado, which made desperate. And it’s desesperado in Spanish, not
  “desperado”, like we have some spanishisms, let’s say, that have entered English, but they can
  enter incorrectly, like “desperado” is desesperado in Spanish; or in English you might hear “no
  problemo”, this is loosely based on Spanish, but of course, problem in Spanish is problema, not
  “problemo”, and actually you would say ningun problema, not “no problema”. So, esperar, to
  wait or to hope. So, talking generally, we wait a lot, we wait around a lot:
Student: Esperamos mucho.
Teacher: Esperamos mucho. Maybe you meant yesterday, here it might be ambiguous, unless the context
  is clear. So, if you want to clarify, you might want to say the word yesterday. How would you say
  we waited a lot yesterday?
Student: Esperamos mucho ayer.
Teacher: Good. Esperamos mucho ayer. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. And what is we eat?
Student: Comemos.
Teacher: Comemos. We ate is comimos, comimos. We ate:
Student: Comimos.
Teacher: We didn’t eat:
Student: No comimos.
Teacher: No comimos. What was to live?
Student: Vivir.
Teacher: And we live (generally):
Student: Vivimos.
Teacher: And we lived:
Student: Vivimos.
Teacher: Vivimos. So, what this means is that because of this one difference we have in the entire language
   between -er and -ir verbs, in the present we have -emos for -er and -imos for -ir, what that means
   is that when we go into the past, -ir verbs stay the same, vivimos-vivimos, but –er verbs are
   different: comemos-comimos. So, what was to see?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: And we see, in the present?
Student: Vemos.
Teacher: Vemos. And we saw:
Student: Vimos.
Teacher: Vimos. Good. What was to go out or to leave?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Good. We are going out, or we are leaving:
Student: Salimos.
Teacher: Good. And we went out or we left:
Student: Salimos.
Teacher: The same. What was to lose?
Student: Perder.
Teacher: Perder. We lose:
Student: Perdemos.
Teacher: Good. We lost:
Student: Perdimos.
Teacher: Good. How would you say we got lost or we lost ourselves?
Student: Nos perdimos.
Teacher: Nos perdimos. Good. Okay, so how would you say we always get lost, but we didn’t get lost
   yesterday? First thing - what was the word for always?
Student: Siempre.
Teacher: Siempre. So, how would you say we always get lost?
Student: Siempre perdemos… Siempre nos perdemos.
Teacher: Good. Siempre nos perdemos, or nos perdemos siempre. But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: We didn’t get lost yesterday:
Student: No perdimos… No nos perdimos ayer.
Teacher: Good. Nos perdemos siempre, pero no nos perdimos ayer. Very good. There we see in that
   sentence, perdemos for present and perdimos for past. But, of course, with -ir verbs, they have
   the same version for both. So, we could say, for example, we don’t go out often, but we went out
   yesterday. And often is a menudo, a menudo. Menudo is like a literary word that's not used very
   often for small, related to minute, actually, or miniscule, it’s not used very often in that sense, in
   the sense of small. But a menudo is used very often to mean often. So, we don’t go out often:
Student: No salimos a menudo.
Teacher: But we went out yesterday:
Student: Pero salimos ayer.
Teacher: Good, very good. So, here we have the present and the past in this sentence and we see that both
   of them are salimos. No salimos a menudo, pero salimos ayer. Let’s make a recap. So, let’s do
   it with hablar and comer, which we will use as our hook verbs. So, I spoke:
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: He spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: We spoke:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: And comer is to eat. So, I ate:
Student: Comí.
Teacher: He ate:
Student: Comió.
Teacher: We ate:
Student: Comimos.
Teacher: Very good.
Spanish Track 61
Teacher: You remember how to say to call? You need to open the association between to call and to phone
   and to call myself, my name is, and then you remember it.
Student: Llamar.
Teacher: Yes. Llamar. Now we can look a little bit at how the line in the past and the dot in the past interact.
   Now, we do this in some very common structures in both languages. For example, you might say
   something like I was cooking when the phone rang. So, I was cooking when the phone rang, which
   part is the line? And which part is the point?
Student: I was cooking is the line.
Teacher: Good.
Student: The phone rang is the dot.
Teacher: Good. So, let’s begin with I was cooking. What is to cook?
Student: Cocinar.
Teacher: Cocinar. Good. I was cooking:
Student: Cocinaba.
Teacher: When:
Student: Cuando.
Teacher: Cuando. The phone rang. El teléfono is the phone, like in English, which is actually from Greek.
   This first bit, tele-, means far, distant, and phone means voice. It’s the “distant voice”, it’s the
   telephone. So when the phone rang, and we will say when the phone sounded. And to sound is
   sonar. Sonar. So when the phone sounded:
Student: Cuando el teléfono sonó.
Teacher: All together, I was cooking when the phone rang. Not from memory but thinking it through again.
   I was cooking when the phone rang:
Student: Cocinaba cuando el teléfono sonó.
Teacher: Very good. Cocinaba cuando el teléfono sonó, or cocinaba cuando sonó el teléfono, which
   would probably be more natural order in Spanish. Cocinaba cuando sonó el teléfono. But both
   orders are perfectly fine. To arrive was llegar. Llegar, to arrive.
Student: Llegar.
Teacher: And this is l-l, so we have the double l, which is like a y sound, e-g-a-r. –ar verb, llegar.
Student: Llegar.
Teacher: I arrived:
Student: Llegué.
Teacher: Llegué. He arrived:
Student: Llegó.
Teacher: Llegó. We arrived:
Student: Llegamos.
Teacher: Llegamos. Good. I was speaking on the phone when Maria arrived. And we’re not going to say
   literally on the phone in Spanish. We will say por, por teléfono, by phone. Por can also mean by.
   So I was speaking on the phone when Maria arrived:
Student: Hablaba por teléfono cuando María llegó.
Teacher: Very good. Hablaba por teléfono cuando María llegó. Or hablaba por teléfono cuando llegó
   María. Either way. Good. So we can see how we’re using the line and the point together. If you
   were to look up to stay in the dictionary, you would find quedarse. Then, you need to do something
   with that se so if you wanted to say I stayed, how would it be?
Student: Me quedé.
Teacher: Me quedé. He stayed? Or she stayed, or you (formal) stayed, it stayed:
Student: Se quedó.
Teacher: Se quedó. And we stayed:
Student: Nos quedamos.
Teacher: Nos quedamos. Which, of course, could also mean we stay or we are staying. Good. What was to
   please? The verb that we use to express like. To please:
Student: Gustar.
Teacher: Gustar. Good. And if you want to say I like it, you say it pleases me. So how do you say I like it?
Student: Me gusto. Me lo gusto.
Teacher: We’re working on intuition, no? We’ve got me and it and we’re throwing it all in there. But we
   must-
Student: Sorry, me gusta.
Teacher: Yes. We must process it literally. It pleases me. It pleases, gusta. It pleases me, me gusta. Good.
   Now if you want to say I liked it, you just say, of course, it pleased me. So how would that be?
Student: “Me gusté.” Sorry, me gustó.
Teacher: Me gustó. Good. Me gusté, what does that mean? Me gusté?
Student: I pleased myself.
Teacher: I liked myself. Ah? Me gustó, it pleased me, I liked it. Good. I didn’t like it:
Student: No me gustó.
Teacher: No me gustó. I didn’t like it, it didn’t please me. Apart from the point in the past, you could also
   use the line in the past here depending on the context. So how would you say that? It wasn’t
   pleasing me:
Student: No me gustaba.
Teacher: No me gustaba. So with this line and point, we’re not looking for direct translations from English.
   We are looking to understand the concept of the line in time and the point in time and applying it
   directly in Spanish. Because in English you would never say something like I wasn’t liking it. And
   a lot of the time it’s totally interchangeable in Spanish. No me gustó, no me gustaba, just means
   you’re thinking in a different way when you say it. No me gustó, you’re referring to something as
   an event, as something closed. And no me gustaba, you’re thinking about something as an ongoing
   thing that occurred over a period of time. Really, a lot of the time that difference between the point
   and the line in time just originates in the mind. Parecer, parecer, was to seem. Parecer.
Student: Parecer.
Teacher: It’s related to apparent and we have aparecer in Spanish, which means to appear.
Student: Is transparent similar?
Teacher: Transparent also is related, yes of course. Good. So parecer is to seem. How would you say it
   seems to me? It seems to me:
Student: Me parece.
Teacher: Good. It seems good to me, or in Spanish it seems well to me:
Student: Me parece bien.
Teacher: Me parece bien. How would you say it seemed good to me?
Student: Me parecí.
Teacher: It seemed:
Student: Ah, yes of course. Me pareció bien.
Teacher: Good. Me pareció bien. It seemed good to me. And you might want to use the line in the past.
   You might want to say, like, it was seeming good to me. So even though this is not a translation
   you would use in English, in Spanish you’re just thinking about do I mean a point in time or do I
   mean ongoing in this context? So we might want it was seeming to me well. How would you say
   that?
Student: Parecer becomes parecía. Me parecía bien.
Teacher: Good. Me parecía bien. It seemed good to me, but when I saw it I didn’t like it. So it seemed good
   to me, it was seeming good to me:
Student: Me parecía bien.
Teacher: But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: When I saw it:
Student: Cuando lo vi.
Teacher: I didn’t like it:
Student: No me gustó.
Teacher: Very good. Me parecía bien, pero cuando lo vi, no me gustó. And again, here we see the
   interaction, no? Between the line and the point. Me parecía bien, it was seeming ok, fine, to me,
   pero cuando lo vi, but when I saw it, this is a very clear point in the past, I didn’t like it, in that
   moment when I saw it I didn’t like it. Again the point in the past. Me parecía bien, pero cuando
   lo vi, no me gustó. Excellent.
 Spanish Track 62
Teacher: What was to give in Spanish?
Student: Dar.
Teacher: Dar. Good. Now dar is irregular in this point in the past, in that whilst it’s an -ar verb it behaves
   like an -er/-ir verb. It’s the only verb that has this particular peculiarity, the only verb that just
   switches sides like this in this point in the past. So, how would you say I gave?
Student: Di.
Teacher: Di. Good. D-i, di. And he gave, she gave, it gave, you (formal) gave:
Student: Dío.
Teacher: And where is the accent?
Student: Sorry, dio.
Teacher: Dio. Good. Dio. We gave:
Student: Dimos.
Teacher: Dimos. Good. How would you say he gave me?
Student: Me dio.
Teacher: Good. Me dio. And he gave me it:
Student: Me lo dio.
Teacher: Me lo dio. He gave us it, he gave it to us:
Student: Nos lo dio.
Teacher: Good. Nos lo dio. He didn’t give it to us:
Student: No nos lo dio.
Teacher: Good. No nos lo dio. I gave it to you (speaking informally) I gave you it, I gave it to you:
Student: Did we do it?
Teacher: I gave:
Student: Ah, I gave.
Teacher: So your mind went to you gave, ah?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: So how do you control that, how do you stop that happening?
Student: Cutting it up.
Teacher: Ok, so your first thought, what is it? Your first thought when you want to build I gave you it, I
   gave it to you.
Student: I gave.
Teacher: Exactly. And then the rest flows off. So I gave you it, speaking informally?
Student: Te lo di.
Teacher: Te lo di. Good. So it’s not a new thing for us to have two of these small words together, nos lo, te
   lo, me lo. What we didn’t see so far is having two words together, two of these small words
   together, where both of them begin with l. That’s because in Spanish, when that happens, a
   phonetic change occurs. So for example, if I wanted to say I gave it to him, it should be le lo di.
   But - and this isn’t about grammar, it’s about phonetics, it’s about sound - Spanish doesn’t like
   that. Spanish doesn’t like the sound of those two l’s together: le lo. Doesn’t like it. So where we
   would have le lo, les lo, les los, le los, any combination of /l/-/l/ together with these small words,
   the first one is going to turn into se. So another se. Ah? But a totally different use, and it’s not
   changing any meaning, it’s just a phonetic issue. So this means that le lo, les lo, become se lo. So
   how would you say I gave it to him?
Student: Se lo di.
Teacher: Good. Se lo di. How would you say I gave it to you guys or to them?
Student: Se lo di.
Teacher: Se lo di. The same. So it is really just a phonetic change. It’s got nothing to do with the different
   meanings that we saw for se, like himself and herself that we saw before. Ah? It’s just a phonetic
   change because Spanish doesn’t like having these two l’s together. Se lo di: I gave it to you guys,
   I gave it to them, I gave it to him, I gave it to her, I gave it to you (formal). How would you say I
   gave them to him?
Student: Se los di.
Teacher: Perfect. Well done. Se los di. So, of course this means that there could be many ambiguities. So
   now is a good time to look at how we can make these clarifications. Generally, not just in this
   structure, but generally. So for example, how would you say I gave him something? I gave him
   something:
Student: Le di algo.
Teacher: Le di algo. So in this case, we might want to clarify as well, because of course le di algo could
   mean I gave him something, I gave her something, I gave you (formal) something. So how do we
   make that clarification? It’s simple. We repeat the whole sentence, and then we say afterwards to
   him, to her. For example, le di algo a él, le di algo a ella. How would you clarify I gave something
   to you, speaking formally?
Student: Le di algo a usted.
Teacher: Good. Le di algo a usted. So actually, we’re repeating, no? We don’t get rid of that le because we
   put a usted, which is excellent for the learner. Because it means you don’t have to worry about
   changing the structure of the sentence when you’re clarifying, using this a to clarify, because
   you’re repeating. Now, we saw before we didn’t have this situation. For example, we could say
   me lo compra, he buys it for me, or lo compra para mí. We don’t repeat the me there. But with
   this a, with this a that we use to clarify, we will always repeat. Le di algo a él. It’s like an
   afterthought. Le di algo a ella. You don’t have to go back and restructure because you’ve made
   that clarification. So going back to this situation when we have two /l/’s together, what was to sell?
Student: Vender.
Teacher: Vender. And how would you say I sold?
Student: Vendí.
Teacher: Vendí. And I sold it:
Student: Lo vendí.
Teacher: Lo vendí. And I sold him it:
Student: L- … se lo vendí.
Teacher: Very good. It would be le lo vendí, but we don’t like this sound in Spanish, so we just say se lo
   vendí. But of course, se lo vendí is very ambiguous. Most of the time we’re going to know what
   we’re talking about because of the context. Usually when we’re speaking we mentioned already
   what or who we’re speaking about. But if you want to clarify it, if you want to be emphatic, you
   can add on afterwards to him. So, how would you do that? I sold it to him:
Student: Se lo vendí a él.
Teacher: Good. So we’re just repeating. Se lo vendí a él. This is probably because this a is actually quite
   flexible. We can use it to clarify, but not just for the preposition to. For example, if I say me lo
   compra a mí, and I use this a to emphasize mí, a mí, to me literally, could mean from me, he buys
   it from me. Or it could mean for me, he buys it for me. Me lo compra a mí. So this a is a bit special.
   We’re using it to clarify and it can replace or represent other prepositions, other than to, which is
   its literal translation. And because it has this special use, we are always repeating with
   a. Whereas, as we saw before, with the other prepositions, we are not repeating. Me lo compra,
   lo compra para mí. No repetition there. But if we use a to make this clarification, we repeat. Me
   lo compra a mí. Ah? So you repeat. Se lo vendí a él. How would you say I sold it to her?
Student: Se lo vendí a ella.
Teacher: Se lo vendí a ella. What if you wanted to say I sold them to her?
Student: Se los vendí a ella.
Teacher: Very good. Se los vendí a ella. What if they were feminine things that you sold to her?
Student: Se las vendí a ella.
Teacher: Good. Se las vendí a ella. So what if actually you sold them to them, not to her? So now, we’re
   going to say I sold them, those feminine things, to them, mixed or masculine group.
Student: Se los vendí-
Teacher: Feminine things.
Student: Sorry, se las vendí a ellos.
Teacher: Se las vendí a ellos. Good. What was to send?
Student: Enviar.
Teacher: Enviar. Good. How would you say he sent?
Student: Envió.
Teacher: Envió. He sent me it:
Student: Me lo envió.
Teacher: Good. He sent us it:
Student: Nos le - sorry - nos lo envió.
Teacher: Nos lo envió. he sent you it (speaking informally):
Student: Te lo envió.
Teacher: Perfect. Te lo envió. So we have no problem with me lo, nos lo, te lo, but of course we can’t have
   le lo. So if you want to say he sent it to her, how will it be?
Student: Se lo envió.
Teacher: Good. You want to clarify, go ahead.
Student: A ella.
Teacher: Good. Se lo envió a ella. And of course we could clarify he as well. Él se lo envió a ella. So it’s
   like you have this base structure, se lo envió, and you can clarify around it. Él se lo envió. Se lo
   envió a ella. Él se lo envió a ella. But what is not changing there is that bit, se lo envió. He sent
   it to them:
Student: Se lo envió a ellos.
Teacher: Good. And what if it was to you guys? He sent it to you guys:
Student: Se lo envió a ustedes.
Teacher: Good. Se lo envió a ustedes. He didn’t send it to you guys yet. He didn’t send it to you guys yet:
Student: It’s no se lo envió a ustedes… and I forgot yet.
Teacher: “All way”.
Student: Ah, todavía.
Teacher: Todavía. Good. So, no se lo envió a ustedes todavía. No se lo envió todavía a ustedes, could go
   that way around as well. I don’t know if I sent it to him, I don’t know if I sent it to him:
Student: No sé si envié – lo envié – se lo envié.
Teacher: Good. No sé si se lo envié. Excellent. So when we’re using this a for clarification or emphasis, we
   are repeating. Se lo envié a él. Se lo compré a ella. So we repeat when we’re using this a for
   emphasis or for clarification. But if we use another preposition, like para for example, lo compré
   para usted, lo compré para ti. Then we don’t repeat. So these very specific details of language,
   I don’t want anybody to worry or stress about remembering or memorizing them. Remember, as
   long as you are actively listening and analyzing the Spanish that you expose yourself to, even if
   you forget it now, you will notice it again for yourself through listening, analyzing, comparing,
   with the skills that we’ve developed during this course. So our focus is to understand it, not to
   memorize it.
Spanish Track 63
Teacher: To remember in Spanish, to remember in Spanish is acordarse. Acordarse. So it’s acordar. It
   just means, this -se on the end, just means that when we use this verb we need to say I remember
   myself to give the meaning of I remember. So how would you say I remember?
Student: Is it acuerdo?
Teacher: Good. The -o splits.
Student: It’s, uh... yeah.
Teacher: So, I remember:
Student: Me acuerdo.
Teacher: Me acuerdo. I don’t remember:
Student: No me acuerdo.
Teacher: No me acuerdo. I don’t remember. No me acuerdo. Good. So, I don’t remember if I gave it to
   him or to her. I don’t remember if I gave it to him or to her. So, I don’t remember:
Student: No me- no me acuerdo.
Teacher: If I gave it to him or to her:
Student: Si lo- si se lo di a él o ella.
Teacher: Or to her:
Student: O a ella.
Teacher: Good. No me acuerdo si se lo di a él o a ella. Very good. How would you say we don’t remember
   if we gave it to him or to them? And we mean feminine them. So, we don’t remember is the first
   bit:
Student: No nos acordamos.
Teacher: Good. No nos acordamos because here we are not stressing the -o. It’s not going to split. No nos
   acordamos. If:
Student: Si.
Teacher: We gave it to him or to them (female group):
Student: Lo dimos, isn’t that right?
Teacher: The to when we actually say to him or to them is the clarification. It’s the repetition.
Student: Se lo dimos.
Teacher: To him or to them. Feminine them:
Student: A él o a ellas.
Teacher: Good. So all together. We don’t remember if we gave it to him or to them (feminine):
Student: No acordamos.
Teacher: Where is the se in no acordamos? Where is the se of acordarse?
Student: No nos acordamos.
Teacher: It became nos.
Student: Si se lo dimos a él o a ellas.
Teacher: Well done. No nos acordamos si se lo dimos a él o a ellas. What was he likes it, it is pleasing to
   him?
Student: Le lo gusta.
Teacher: Make sure you take the mid road until you are extremely comfortable with how gustar works.
   Take the mid road of it is pleasing to him:
Student: Ah, le gusta.
Teacher: Good. Le gusta. She likes it:
Student: La gusta. No, le gusta.
Teacher: Le gusta. It’s still to her. It is pleasing to her. Le gusta. So le gusta could mean he likes it, she
   likes it. What else could it mean? It is pleasing to who else?
Student: Usted.
Teacher: Good. So maybe here you want to clarify le gusta, it’s not very obvious who you mean. By the
   context it might be, but we’re seeing especially with this group of he, she, and it and usted all
   together, many times we are wanting to clarify. So bearing in mind that the structure is it is pleasing
   to him, it is pleasing to her, it is pleasing to you, how are you going to clarify? If you want to
   clarify that you mean she likes it:
Student: Le gusta a ella.
Teacher: A ella. Good. So this is why it’s important to take that mid translation as well. Otherwise you
   would probably just say ella le gusta, which would mean she’s pleasing to whoever that le is. We
   would just understand that somebody likes her. She is pleasing to, ah? So, to make it clear we need
   to put the a. Le gusta a ella. A ella le gusta. To her it is pleasing. It is pleasing to her.
   And if we wanted to say he liked it, it was pleasing to him:
Student: So it’s gustó.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Le gustó.
Teacher: So this could mean it was pleasing to him, it was pleasing to her, it was pleasing to you (formal),
   could be any combination of he, she, it, or you (formal) liking. He, she, it or you (formal). So how
   would you clarify? How would you say it was pleasing to her? She liked it, it was pleasing to her:
Student: Le gustó a ella.
Teacher: Le gustó a ella. Good.
Spanish Track 64
Teacher: What was to do or to make in Spanish?
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Hacer. Good. How would you say it does or it makes?
Student: Hace.
Teacher: Hace. Good. Now hace, you can use like ago. Like in English when you say two weeks ago, you
   can say it makes two weeks in Spanish, and you get that meaning. So week is semana. Two is - do
   you remember two?
Student: Dos.
Teacher: Dos. So two weeks ago, you will say it makes two weeks:
Student: Hace dos semanas.
Teacher: Hace dos semanas. I saw him two weeks ago:
Student: Lo vi hace dos semanas.
Teacher: Good. Lo vi hace dos semanas. Good. To respond is responder. Responder. How would you say
   I responded?
Student: Respondí.
Teacher: Respondí. How would you say I responded to her?
Student: La respondí. Le. Le respondí.
Teacher: Good. Le respondí. I responded to her. I responded to her seven weeks ago. Do you remember
   how to say seven? Related to September:
Student: Siete.
Teacher: Siete. Good. So I responded to her seven weeks ago:
Student: Le respondí hace siete semanas.
Teacher: Good. Le respondí hace siete semanas. Now in Spanish, you can say I responded her it. For
   example, I responded to her letter or I responded to her mail. Instead of saying it this way, to her
   mail, in Spanish you can just say I responded him the mail. I responded her the mail. Or if you
   know what you are talking about, I responded him it. I responded her it. This is because, and
   something we’ll look at again later, Spanish does not use possessive words as much as English
   does. So, it would be much more natural in Spanish, I responded her the mail. I responded him the
   mail, instead of I responded to her mail. So how would you say I responded her it, which isn’t
   great English, but it’s perfect Spanish?
Student: Se lo respondí.
Teacher: Good. Se lo respondí. So the se is actually le, to her. The lo is el mail and you get se lo respondí.
   I responded to her the mail. Good. Month is mes. Mes. M-e-s.
Student: Mes.
Teacher: It’s a masculine word, so how would you say the month?
Student: El mes.
Teacher: Good, and how would you say a month or one month?
Student: Un mes.
Teacher: Un mes. So un mes can be a month or one month. So how would you say I responded it to her one
   month ago? I responded to her mail, I responded her it one month ago:
Student: Se lo respondí hace un mes.
Teacher: Good. Se lo respondí hace un mes. Good. So we have respondí. I responded. How would you
   say he, she, it, you (formal) responded?
Student: Respondió.
Teacher: Good. Respondió. And we responded:
Student: Respondimos.
Teacher: Good. Respondimos. So respondí, respondió, respondimos. Let’s make a quick recap with an -ar
   verb. How would you say discrimination?
Student: Descriminación.
Teacher: Again?
Student: Descriminación.
Teacher: In English we say discrimination or descrimination?
Student: Oh, it’s with an i, yeah.
Teacher: It’s with an i, right?
Student: Yeah, discriminación.
Teacher: Discriminación. To discriminate:
Student: Discriminar.
Teacher: Discriminar. I discriminated:
Student: Discriminé.
Teacher: Discriminé. He, or she, or it, you (formal) discriminated:
Student: Discriminó.
Teacher: Good. And we discriminated:
Student: Discriminamos.
Teacher: Good. So we have two more people to learn for the point in the past. They and you informal. Let’s
   begin with you informal. For you informal, in the point in the past we have -aste for -ar verbs and
   -iste for -er/-ir verbs. -aste for -ar verbs and -iste for -er/-ir verbs. So how would you say you
   spoke, speaking informally?
Student: Hablaste.
Teacher: Hablaste. And you ate, speaking informally:
Student: Comiste.
Teacher: Good. Comiste. Did you eat?:
Student: ¿Comiste?
Teacher: ¿Comiste? Didn’t you eat?:
Student: ¿No comiste?
Teacher: ¿No comiste? Didn’t you eat it?:
Student: ¿No lo comiste?
Teacher: ¿No lo comiste? Good. What was to leave or to go out?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. How would you say did you go out? Did you leave?:
Student: ¿Saliste?
Teacher: ¿Saliste? Good. You didn’t go out last night? Last night is anoche. Anoche.
Student: Anoche.
Teacher: Now if you translate tonight directly, what you will come up with is anoche. So you must be
   careful not to get confused here. How do you say tonight in Spanish?
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. “This night”. So anoche is last night, not tonight. So how would you say did you go
   out last night (speaking informally)?
Student: ¿Saliste anoche?
Teacher: Good. ¿Saliste anoche? Didn’t you go out last night?:
Student: ¿No saliste anoche?
Teacher: Good. ¿No saliste anoche? What was to live?
Student: Vivir.
Teacher: Vivir. And how do you say where?
Student: Donde.
Teacher: Donde. Where did you live?:
Student: ¿Dónde viviste?
Teacher: ¿Dónde viviste? Where were you living?:
Student: So that’s the line. ¿Dónde vivías?
Teacher: Good. ¿Dónde vivías? So in many cases both line and point are perfectly fine. ¿Dónde viviste?
   ¿Dónde vivías? All that means is that the speaker has two different ideas in their mind. Maybe
   you go abroad to study and I’ll tell you ¿dónde viviste? Or maybe I’ll tell you ¿dónde vivías?
   ¿Dónde viviste? Where did you live? And this idea in my mind which is this closed amount of
   time. Where were you living? just means the idea in my mind is an ongoing idea of time. So many
   times it is completely interchangeable. What was to wait?
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: Esperar. Esperar. So for you informal, we have -aste for the point in the past. So how would you
   say you waited, speaking informally?
Student: Esperaste.
Teacher: Esperaste. Good. Did you wait for me?:
Student: ¿Me esperaste?
Teacher: ¿Me esperaste? Didn’t you wait for me?:
Student: ¿No me esperaste?
Teacher: Why didn’t you wait for me?:
Student: ¿Por qué no me esperaste?
Teacher: Good. ¿Por qúe no me esperaste? What was to arrive?
Student: Llegar.
Teacher: Llegar. Good. How do you say when did you arrive? When did you arrive? (informally):
Student: ¿Cuándo llegaste?
Teacher: Good. ¿Cuándo llegaste? This is an example of when you would need the point, because you
  probably wouldn’t want to say when were you arriving, no? So here’s very strongly the point in
  time. When did you arrive? ¿Cuándo llegaste? So we have -aste and -iste for you informal. For
  they, we have -aron for -ar verbs and -ieron for -er/-ir verbs. So, how would you say they spoke?
  They spoke:
Student: Hablaron.
Teacher: Hablaron. They waited:
Student: Esperaron.
Teacher: Good. They prepared it:
Student: Lo prepararon.
Teacher: Lo prepararon. Good. We have -aron for -ar verbs and -ieron, i-e-r-o-n, for -er/-ir verbs. How
  would you say they ate?
Student: Comieron.
Teacher: Comieron. They left, they went out:
Student: Salieron.
Teacher: Salieron. They sold them:
Student: Los vendieron.
Teacher: Good. Los vendieron. Good. So let’s have a quick review of the panorama of this point in the past
  with hablar and comer which we might want to use as our hooks. So we’ll begin with hablar.
  How do you say I spoke?
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Hablé. He spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: Habló. We spoke:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. You spoke (informal):
Student: Hablaste.
Teacher: Hablaste. And they spoke:
Student: Hablaron.
Teacher: Hablaron. Good. Hablé, habló, hablamos, hablaste, hablaron. Now let’s do the same for comer,
   so for -er/-ir verbs. How do you say I ate?
Student: Comí.
Teacher: Comí. He, she, it, you (formal) ate:
Student: Comió.
Teacher: Comió. We ate:
Student: Comemos.
Teacher: That’s the present.
Student: Comimos.
Teacher: Comimos. Good. You ate (informally):
Student: Comiste.
Teacher: Comiste. And they ate:
Student: Comieron.
Teacher: Comieron. So what’s very interesting here is that for -er/-ir verbs in the present, we had /e/ popping
   up everywhere. Vive, viven, vives and just one /i/. Just one /i/ sound. Just one i popping up,
   vivimos. But everything else was /e/ for -er/-ir verbs in the present, but in the past for -er/-ir verbs
   we have i dominating the stage. We have the i, /i/ sound everywhere and this time the letter e, the
   /e/ sound, occupying only one space. Popping up in only one place which is -ieron. Comí, comió,
   comiste, comimos, comieron, which is the exact inverse of what happens in the present tense. We
   can see also a logic that crosses over between the -ar group and the -er/-ir group. For example, we
   have I spoke, how is it?
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Hablé. And he spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: Habló. We saw the -er/-ir in this past point has a special affiliation to the /i/ sound, the i, the letter
   i. So whilst we have hablé for -ar verbs, for -er/-ir verbs what do we have? How would we say I
   ate?
Student: Comí.
Teacher: Comí. And whilst we have habló for -ar verbs, what do we have for -er/-ir verbs? How would you
   say he ate?
Student: Comió.
Teacher: Comió. So it’s like the -ar version, but with that important /i/ popping up again. We have, for we
   spoke, what do we have?
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. And for we ate:
Student: Comimos.
Teacher: Comimos. That important /i/, the i, the /i/ sound again. For you (informal) spoke, what do we have?
Student: Hablaste.
Teacher: Hablaste. But you ate:
Student: Comiste.
Teacher: Comiste. You remembered the importance of that i. Comiste. They spoke:
Student: Hablaron.
Teacher: Hablaron. And they ate:
Student: Comieron.
Teacher: Comieron. Again that important i and that e getting just one small look in, in that dot in the past
   to remind us that this is -er/-ir group, not just -ir. Just as what happened the other way around in
   the present. Good.
Spanish Track 65
Teacher: What was the word for nothing?
Student: Nada.
Teacher: Nada. And nobody:
Student: Nadie.
Teacher: Yes, nadie. What was the word for more, like in “more late” or later?
Student: Más.
Teacher: Más.
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Good. So if you add más to nada or nadie you get else. So más can also mean else, like nadie
   más.
   What does that mean? Nadie más:
Student: Nobody else.
Teacher: Nobody else. Nada más:
Student: Nothing else.
Teacher: Nothing else. Good. So how would you say I didn’t eat anything else? I didn’t eat anything else:
Student: No comí - anything?
Teacher: So we have double negative. So we’ll say I didn’t eat nothing else, nothing more:
Student: No comí nada más.
Teacher: Good. No comí nada más. I didn’t eat anything else. Good. Didn’t you eat anything else?
   (speaking informally) Didn’t you eat anything else?:
Student: I forgot the informal for past.
Teacher: You have the s in there which relates to you informal. And you also have the t in there,
Student: Ah, comiste.
Teacher: Good. Which also relates to you informal, that t, but in a different way. But they’re both in there
   and they will help you remember that ending, comiste. Didn’t you eat anything else?:
Student: ¿No comiste nada más?
Teacher: Good. ¿No comiste nada más? What was to see?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Ver. I saw:
Student: “Verí.” Yeah, sorry, vi.
Teacher: Vi. Good. You got the ending right. He saw:
Student: Vio.
Teacher: Vio. Good. You saw (speaking informally):
Student: Viste.
Teacher: Viste. We saw:
Student: Vimos.
Teacher: Vimos. And they saw:
Student: Vieron.
Teacher: Vieron.
Student: The accent’s on the /e/.
Teacher: Yes, vieron. So that’s our set. Vi, vio, vimos, viste, vieron. Good. Didn’t you see me last night?
   (speaking informally) Didn’t you see me last night?:
Student: ¿No me viste anoche?
Teacher: Good. ¿No me viste anoche? Time in the sense of occasion, no? - like when we say once we mean
  one time. Or when we say again we mean another time - is vez. Vez. V-e-z. So in Spain this would
  sound like /bes/. Vez.
Student: Vez.
Teacher: This is a feminine word, so how would you say one time or once?
Student: Una vez.
Teacher: Una vez. So how would you say I saw him once?
Student: Lo vi una vez.
Teacher: Good. Lo vi una vez. Good. How would you say I saw them once?
Student: Los vi una vez.
Teacher: Good. Los vi una vez. They saw them once:
Student: Los vieron una vez.
Teacher: Good. Los vieron una vez. How do you think you would say one more time, one more time, how
  do you think you would say that?
Student: Una vez más.
Teacher: Yes, una vez más. Good. So you could say something like I want to see them one more time. I
  want to see them one more time. How would you say that?
Student: Quiero verlos una vez más.
Teacher: Good. Quiero verlos una vez más. I want to see them one more time. Once more. What was the
  word for we? The word for we:
Student: Nosotros.
Teacher: Nosotros. Good. Now nosotros is actually the combination of nos, like how we have in us, and
  otros which means others. So we is kind of like us others. How would you say another time? And
  you don’t say an other time in Spanish, you just say other time. So you don’t need an. So another
  time:
Student: Otra vez.
Teacher: Otra vez. Good. We can take this otros, we can work backwards to get otra, otra vez. So you can
   use this like again. Otra vez. Another time. So you could say I want to see them again. I want to
   see them again:
Student: Quiero verlos otra vez.
Teacher: Good. Quiero verlos otra vez. What was to leave or to go out?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. Good. And what was to dance, related to ballerina?
Student: Bailar.
Teacher: Bailar. So how would you ask informally, did you go out to dance again? Did you go out to dance
   again (speaking informally)?
Student: ¿Saliste a bailar otra vez?
Teacher: Very good. Saliste a, because we have this verb of motion of coming and going. ¿Saliste a bailar
   otra vez? Good. What was to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. And I spoke:
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Hablé. He spoke, she spoke, it spoke, you (formal) spoke:
Student: Habló
Teacher: Habló. We spoke:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. You (informal):
Student: Hablaste.
Teacher: Hablaste. And they:
Student: Hablaron.
Teacher: Hablaron. Well done. To arrive, to arrive was llegar.
Student: Llegar.
Teacher: Llegar. How would you say you arrived, informally?
Student: Llegaste.
Teacher: Llegaste. Did you arrive late again? Did you arrive late again?:
Student: So ¿Llegaste tarde otra vez?
Teacher: Good. ¿Llegaste tarde otra vez? Did you arrive late again? Good. What was my house?
Student: Mi casa.
Teacher: Mi casa. How would you say he arrived late to my house again? So he arrived late to my house
   again:
Student: Llegó tarde a mi casa otra vez.
Teacher: Good. Llegó tarde a mi casa otra vez. Or llegó a mi casa tarde otra vez. This is ah, flexible.
   How would you say he arrived at my house again, wanting to speak with me. He arrived at my
   house, to my house, again, wanting to speak with me:
Student: Llegó a mi casa otra vez,
Teacher: Very good. Wanting:
Student: Is it querer, to want?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: So, queriendo. Queriendo hablar conmigo.
Teacher: Good. Llegó a mi casa otra vez queriendo hablar conmigo. So we saw that we don’t use the -ing
   in Spanish nearly half as much as we do in English. In English we really overuse the -ing, but this
   is one situation where we do want it, in structures like this. He arrived at my house again, wanting
  to speak with me. Llegó a mi casa otra vez queriendo hablar conmigo. Good. So my house is
  mi casa, your house, speaking informally, is tu casa. Tu casa.
Student: Tu casa.
Teacher: You might have heard the expression mi casa es tu casa. What does that mean?
Student: My house is your house.
Teacher: If you want to say at what time, you say at what hour. How would that be?
Student: ¿A qué hora?
Teacher: Hora. Here we use hora. ¿A qué hora? Good. So how would you say at what time did they arrive
  at your house? To your house? At what time did they arrive at your house?:
Student: ¿A qué hora llegaron a tu casa?
Teacher: Good. ¿A qué hora llegaron a tu casa? Very good. At what time did they arrive at your house or
  to your house? Good. If you say a la vez, a la vez, it means at the same time, like in English when
  we say at a time. A la vez. Two at a time, we can say in English. This is at the time, at the same
  time. A la vez. So you might want to say everybody arrived at my house at the same time.
  What was the word for all?
Student: Todo.
Teacher: Todo. Good. If you make this plural, todos, you get everybody. Everybody, or you might also hear
  in Spanish todo el mundo. “All the world” to say everybody, but todos is very common. So
  everybody arrived at my house at the same time:
Student: Todos llegaron a mi casa a la vez.
Teacher: Good. Todos llegaron a mi casa a la vez. Todos llegaron a la vez a mi casa. Flexible. What was
  to find or to encounter?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. And I found:
Student: Encontré.
Teacher: Encontré. I didn’t find anything else in your house. What was your house again?
Student: Tu casa.
Teacher: Tu casa. Good. I didn’t find anything else, nothing more, in your house. I didn’t find anything else
   in your house:
Student: No encontré nada más en tu casa.
Teacher: Good. I didn’t find anything else in your house. No encontré nada más en tu casa. Good. So we
   have mi casa, tu casa. Now the word for our is nuestro. Our house is nuestra casa. Nuestra
   casa. We can see the o splitting of nosotros there in nuestro, nuestra. So that’s our. So how
   would you say did you visit our house? What is to visit? Visitation:
Student: Visitación. Visitar.
Teacher: Good. So did you visit our house, speaking informally:
Student: ¿Visitaste nuestra casa?
Teacher: Good. ¿Visitaste nuestra casa? Did you visit our house? How would you say we are with our
   friends - how do you think you would say that, we are with our friends? We are with, what to be
   do you think we will use?
Student: Estar.
Teacher: Estar because we are with, location. Good. So we are with our friends:
Student: Estamos con nuestros amigos.
Teacher: Good. Nuestros amigos. Good, you make it plural to match amigos. We are with our friends.
   What if we meant all female friends?
Student: Estamos con nuestras amigas.
Teacher: Good. Estamos con nuestras amigas. How would you say I am with my friends? I am with my
   friends:
Student: Estoy con, is it mis amigos?
Teacher: Yes. Estoy con mis amigos. So the words for possession, mi, tu, nuestro can change for number
   to match the number: mi amigo, mis amigos. And if it ends in -o like nuestro, it can change for
   gender as well. Nuestro amigo, nuestra amiga. So we have mi/my, tu/your, nuestro or
   nuestra/our. For his/her/their/your (speaking formally), for all of that, we have the same word
   which is su. Su. S-u.
Student: Su.
Teacher: Su. So how would you say I want to go to his house? I want to go to his house:
Student: Quiero ir a su casa.
Teacher: Good. Quiero ir a su casa. I want to go to his house. How would you say I want to go to their
   house?
Student: Quiero ir a su casa.
Teacher: Good. Quiero ir a su casa. So it’s the same. If you put it in plural or not refers to the things that
   are possessed, not the possessors. So avoid any temptation to say sus, because you mean they. You
   are only going to say sus if you are saying houses, for example. So if you were to say I want to go
   to their houses, there you can put it in plural. How would that be?
Student: Quiero ir a sus casas.
Teacher: Good. Quiero ir a sus casas. And I want to go to his houses, I want to go to his houses:
Student: Quiero ir a sus casas.
Teacher: Exactly. The same. Quiero ir a sus casas. So these possessive words mi, tu, nuestro, su, they
   refer to the thing being possessed, rather than the possessor when they’re changing. If you want to
   say my own house, if you want to say my own house or my very own house, you can say mi propia
   casa. Like property. Mi propia casa.
Student: Mi propia casa.
Teacher: Good. How would you say my own car?
Student: Mi propio auto.
Teacher: Good. Mi propio auto. The word for eye in Spanish - not I as in your, eye as in the two things in
  your head, is ojo. Ojo. O-j-o. Ojo.
Student: Ojo.
Teacher: Ojo. How would you say my own eyes, my own eyes?
Student: Mi propios ojos.
Teacher: There’s some kind of disagreements going on in there.
Student: Mis. Mis propios ojos.
Teacher: Good. So, I saw it with my own eyes. I saw it with my own eyes:
Student: Lo vi con mis propios ojos.
Teacher: Good. Lo vi con mis propios ojos. Very good. How would you say I want to live in my own house?
  I want to live in my own house:
Student: Quiero vivir en mi propio casa, mi propia casa.
Teacher: Good. Quiero vivir en mi propia casa. Good. I want to live in my own house. Good.
 Spanish Track 66
Teacher: So, we are looking a bit at possession now, and how we express that in Spanish. Now, in English
   we use possessive words: my, your, his, her, much more than we do in Spanish. So, it’s something
   we want to look out for. We already saw an example actually, for example, how we would say I
   responded him the mail, rather than I responded to his mail. Another example would be how we
   refer to body parts in Spanish. So you don’t say in Spanish, for example, my leg hurts, you say it
   hurts me the leg. Doler, doler, is to hurt. How would you say, firstly, it hurts me, from doler? It
   hurts me:
Student: Me dolo.
Teacher: It hurts me:
Student: Lo me-
Teacher: I want you to divide the sentence up and to take control of it, no guessing. It hurts me:
Student: Dole.
Teacher: Good, it would be “dole”, but the o splits. So, this is an error that’s not a problem, you thought it
   through and you got to “dole”, but the o splits here.
Student: So, me duele.
Teacher: Me duele. Good. Me duele. So, you don’t say in Spanish my leg hurts – “mi pierna duele” – you
   don’t say that, you say it hurts me the leg, it hurts me the leg. So, leg is pierna, how would you
   say my leg hurts?
Student: Me duele la pierna.
Teacher: Good. Me duele la pierna. If you want to say my leg doesn’t hurt anymore, you can just use more
   for anymore. So, what was more, again?
Student: Más.
Teacher: Más. So, my leg doesn’t hurt anymore:
Student: No me duele la pierna más.
Teacher: Good. Now, the noun, pain, is dolor, dolor.
Student: Dolor.
Teacher: If you want to say I have a headache, you can just say I have pain of head – dolor de cabeza,
   dolor de cabeza. So, how would that be, I have a headache?
Student: Tengo dolor de cabeza.
Teacher: Good. Tengo dolor de cabeza. Good. I had, I was having, pain of head, so, the line in the past.
Student: Tenía dolor de cabeza.
Teacher: Good. Tenía dolor de cabeza. And of course we can also say me duele la cabeza or me dolía la
   cabeza – this would be another way of saying it. So, just as we can say dolor de cabeza to say
   headache, the ache of the head. If we want to say José’s house, Maria’s house, in Spanish we will
   say the house of Maria, the house of José. So, how would you say the house of José, José’s house?
Student: La casa de José.
Teacher: So, how would you say we are going to José’s house?
Student: Vamos a la casa de José.
Teacher: Good. Vamos a la casa de José. What if you wanted to say we are going to Maria’s party, we are
   going to Maria’s party:
Student: Vamos a la fie-
Teacher: That’s correct.
Student: Vamos a la fiesta de María.
Teacher: Yes. Vamos a la fiesta de María. Very good. What was nobody?
Student: Nadie.
Teacher: Nadie. And nobody else or nobody more:
Student: Nadie más.
Teacher: Good. I didn’t speak with anybody else in Maria’s party. I didn’t speak with anyone else in Maria’s
   party, I only spoke with you. So, let’s start from the beginning. I didn’t speak:
Student: No hablé.
Teacher: With anybody else:
Student: Con nadie más.
Teacher: In Maria’s party:
Student: En la fiesta de María.
Teacher: Good. No hablé con nadie más en la fiesta de María, I only spoke with you. Now, only or just,
   that we say a lot in English, I just spoke with you, I only spoke with you, in Spanish is solo, solo.
   So, I only spoke with you (speaking informally):
Student: Hablaste,
Teacher: I only spoke, with you, don’t let it blend together.
Student: Hablé contigo solo.
Teacher: Good. Or, more naturally might be solo hablé contigo. But solo at the end there, it’s fine, it just
   sounds more emphatic, you might want to be emphatic here: no hablé con nadie más en la fiesta
   de Maria, solo hablé contigo. Hablé solo contigo, hablé contigo solo.
 Spanish Track 67
Teacher: I would like to talk a little bit more about writing in Spanish. So, we haven’t really looked so much
   about how to read and write in Spanish, we’ve spelled some words, we’ve discussed some sounds
   and we’ve looked at convertible words, convertible words that we convert over from Latin English
   into Spanish, and they give us a great idea about how to read and write in Spanish.
   For example, if we have a /j/ sound, for example in general, how is this pronounced in Spanish?
Student: /kheneral/.
Teacher: /kheneral/. And it’s spelled the same. So, there we understand that g-e makes /khe/ sound without
   having to learn it formally, we can just look back to these convertible words when we are unsure
   of how a sound might be pronounced. So, maybe you see c-e together and you are like “is that /se/
   or is that /ke/?” But then if you look back to concentración, then you have your answer: “con-
   cen”: c-e, concentración gives you your answer. So, apart from the actual sounds we also need to
   understand where the stress in any given word is when we read it. So, in Spanish, you may have
   noticed you have written accents, little dashes above some vowels. Now, this isn’t like French, for
   example, where the little dashes might actually change the sound of the vowel. None of that,
   luckily, is going on in Spanish. The written accent is just showing the stress, but why do we have
   it sometimes and not other times? So, there is a general rule in Spanish, which is: if the word ends
   in a vowel, an n, or an s, the accent should be on the penultimate syllable, on the second last
   syllable. Now, why do you think vowels and then n’s and s’s have been singled out for that role,
   what if you look at our verbs? What do our verb forms end in?
Student: Well the “they” end in an n.
Teacher: Right.
Student: Ah yes, s as well.
Teacher: Or?
Student: Vowel.
Teacher: Exactly. So, it’s what our verbs end in: an n, s, or vowel. So, Spanish says if a word ends in n, s,
   or a vowel, then natural accent will be on the penultimate syllable, the second last syllable.
   Diferente, habla, hablan, hablas, hablamos, ending s, but we are adding two syllables, so still
   on the second last, hablamos. Importante, adictivo. Now, if the word ends in any other
   consonant, any other consonant that’s not n or s, then the natural accent place is to go to the end
   of the word, and we see this perfectly with any “to” verb. How do you say to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Accent on the end. Comer. To be, for states?
Student: Estar.
Teacher: Estar. To speak:
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: Hablar. To find:
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. So, this r is not an n or an s or a vowel, and what that means is that the accent is coming
   on the end. So, these are our natural accents, and if the word obeys the rules of the natural accents,
   we have no written accent, generally, there's a couple of exceptions which I will mention. So, if
   there is no written accent, you follow those rules. If it ends n, s, or vowel, you put the accent on
   the second last syllable, and if it ends in any other consonant you are putting the accent on the end.
   But if your word breaks this rule, then you have a written accent to show you where you should
   be stressing. So, for example, what is tradition in Spanish?
Student: Tradición.
Teacher: Tradición. And what are you ending it with? What is the last letter?
Student: n.
Teacher: And where is the accent?
Student: At the end.
Teacher: At the end. Does this break our rule?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: So, the /o/ will have a written accent, that last o will have a written accent on the end, showing you
   that you are stressing it. Tradición. So, all of these –ión words, that all have their accent on the
   end - situación, opinión - they all have a written accent there on the end. So, now I’m gonna tell
   you some words, that we’ve come across already, and I want you to tell me if they will have a
   written accent or not. So, what you need to decide is “are they breaking the accent rule or not”.
   Encuentro. Encuentro. Firstly, what does that mean, encuentro?
Student: I encounter.
Teacher: Good, I find. Encuentro. Do we have a written accent there?
Student: No.
Teacher: No, good. Encontró. What does that mean first, encontró?
Student: I- sorry. He/she/it or you (formal) found.
Teacher: Good. And does it have a written accent?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Yes, because it’s breaking the rule, we're ending in a vowel and we have the accent on the end. So,
   all of these, in that point in the past, are gonna have the accent. Encontró, habló, llamó, llegó.
   Good. Vive. Vive. Firstly, what does that mean? Vive:
Student: He/she/it/you (formal) live.
Teacher: Good. Does it have an accent?
Student: No.
Teacher: Good. Vivió:
Student: It has an accent.
Teacher: Where?
Student: At the o.
Teacher: Good. Vivió – he lived, she lived, you (formal) lived, it lived. Limón, what do you think limón
   means?
Student: Lemon.
Teacher: Lemon. Good. Which is a Persian word actually, and it actually was used to talk about citrus fruits
   generically, generally, and lime came from the same word, so lemon and lime is actually the same
   word essentially. Does it have an accent, limón?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Yes, cause it should be LI-mon, right, but it’s not, it’s li-MÓN, it’s breaking that rule, so it has a
   written accent. So, when we are reading Spanish, if the word ends in a vowel, an n, or an s, we
   want to put the accent on the penultimate syllable. If it ends in another consonant, we wanna put
   the accent on the end, unless we are shown with a written accent that the rule is being broken.
   Salud means health, related to salute in English. Salud, and you can say it when you toast. Does
   it have a written accent?
Student: No.
Teacher: No, good, it ends in a d, so we expect the accent to be on the end, salud. So, usually accents are
   written to show us that we are breaking the accent rule, but there are some other situations where
   we have a written accent. One of these situations is when we have words that are monosyllables –
   words that are just one syllable - and we can differentiate them with a written accent. For example,
   how was the word for yes?
Student: Sí.
Teacher: And how was the word for if?
Student: Si.
Teacher: Si. It’s the same word, so yes is written with a written accent, and if is not. Now this written accent
   doesn’t change the pronunciation, this differentiates them so when you are reading you don’t have
   the ambiguity that could sometimes be caused by “oh, is that a yes or an if?”, both could make
   sense there, especially because you use yes emphatically, in Spanish you can say sí lo quiero, yes
   I want it, but if that’s written and you don’t hear the emphasis, sí lo quiero, then you might read
   if I want it. So, to clear up that ambiguity when you have monosyllables - words of one syllable -
   that are the same, one will take an accent to show the difference. How was for me?
Student: Para mí or por mí.
Teacher: Good, very good, either one, depending what for you want. Now, how was my house?
Student: Mi casa.
Teacher: Mi casa. So, this is different mi: one is the mí that comes after prepositions – para mí, por mí, de
   mí – and the other one is for possession – my. So, para mí: there you have the written accent on
   the mí of para mí, and you don’t have it on mi casa, just to show the difference. What was the
   word for you, speaking informally?
Student: Tú.
Teacher: Tú. And what was your house?
Student: Tu casa.
Teacher: Tu casa. The word for you, tú, takes a written accent, but the word for your in your house, tu casa,
   doesn’t. So, monosyllables that are the same are differentiated by accent. I know, how do you say
   I know?
Student: Sé.
Teacher: Yes, this sé has a written accent; the se of se lo doy, I give it to him, the se of se queda, he remains
   himself/she remains herself, doesn’t have an accent; only the sé of saber, I know, has one. So, it’s
   something you will pick up reading. Another example where we have accents is to differentiate
   question words from non-question words when they are the same. For example you have donde,
   what does donde mean?
Student: Where.
Teacher: Where. But sometimes donde is a question word, like ¿dónde estás? Where are you? There it will
   go with an accent, but if I say I’m going to meet him where we saw the football, this is not a
   question, so it doesn’t have an accent, so Spanish likes to differentiate them as well. But now we
   are entering quite a bit of detail and many Spanish speakers, when they are writing, make these
mistakes as well and don’t put these accents where they should, but I’m explaining just in case you
come across dónde with an accent and you don’t understand why it’s there because it’s not
breaking the accent rule – this is why. So, in the same way we have como, which means how or
like, the cómo for how takes an accent and the como for like doesn’t. So, there are a couple of
grammatical examples, when we are having accents just to differentiate words that are the same or
to differentiate question words from non-question words, but most of the time they are directing
us to break the accenting rules. And it’s very easy to remember the accenting rules because we
only need to look at the present tense. We know that our verbs end in vowels, n’s or s’s, and in the
present tense we always have the accent on the penultimate syllable without any written accent,
with, of course, that one exception, estar, where we have estás, están, está and we do have a
written accent. So we can look back there at the present tense to remind us that if the word ends n,
s, or vowel, the natural accent is on the penultimate syllable, like the verbs in the present tense,
and if it ends in any other letter, the natural accent is on the end of the word. And if we break this
rule we show it with a written accent.
Spanish Track 68
Teacher: What was tonight in Spanish, tonight?
Student: Esta noche.
Teacher: Esta noche. Good, “this night”. And we can use this as a hook to work out the other this’s and
   that’s and these and those that we might need. So, esta noche, which tells us that noche is what
   kind of noun, what gender?
Student: Feminine.
Teacher: Feminine. Good, and what if you wanted to say that night? What do you do to esta to get that?
Student: Esa.
Teacher: Esa. Good, take away the t, good, so that night:
Student: Esa noche.
Teacher: Esa noche. And those nights:
Student: Esas noches.
Teacher: Esas noches. Good. The word for man is hombre, hombre, h-o-m-b-r-e, hombre.
Student: Hombre.
Teacher: Good. How would you say this man?
Student: Esta hombre.
Teacher: You think hombre is a feminine word?
Student: No. Este hombre.
Teacher: Este hombre. Good. That man:
Student: Ese hombre.
Teacher: Good. You can also say el hombre este, el hombre ese, to say this man or that man in Spanish,
   which might be a structure taken from Arabic, because in Arabic you don’t really have to be in the
  present tense, so you can’t say this man, because you would understand from it that this is a man,
  so in Arabic it’s the same: alrajul hdha - el hombre este. As I mentioned before when languages
  come into contact, like the eight hundred years between Spanish and Arabic, they don’t just share
  vocabulary. How would you say these men?
Student: Estos hombres.
Teacher: Good. Estos hombres. So, with este we have the /e/ of el, el hombre, este hombre, and with estos
  we have the -os of los, los hombres, estos hombres, these men. How about those men?
Student: Esos hombres.
Teacher: Esos hombres. Good. So, this means that we have este and esta for this, when we are referring to
  a masculine noun or a feminine noun. But sometimes we say this just generally, oh, I can’t believe
  this, we don’t mean a specific noun when we say I can’t believe this, so we have like a neuter this,
  that is not masculine or feminine, and that one is esto. So, creer is to believe, creer, with two e’s.
  How would you say I don’t believe this?
Student: No creo esto.
Teacher: Good. No creo esto. Good. I don't believe this. How would you say I don’t like anything more than
  this? In Spanish we will say nothing pleases me more than this, nothing pleases me more than this,
  I don’t like anything more than this:
Student: Nada me gusta más que esto.
Teacher: Good. Nada me gusta más que esto. How would you say nothing pleased me more than that? I
  didn’t like anything more than that, nothing pleased me more than that:
Student: Nada me gusta-
Teacher: Nothing pleased me:
Student: Nada me gustó más que eso.
Teacher: Good. Nada me gustó más que eso. Nothing pleased me more than that, I didn’t like anything
  more than that. Nada me gustó más que eso. Tan, tan, in Spanish means so, like in the sense of
  so tired, tan. T-a-n. How would you say so tired?
Student: Tan cansado.
Teacher: Good. So, how would you say I was so tired, and we mean a line in time?
Student: Estaba tan cansado.
Teacher: And you being feminine?
Student: Cansada.
Teacher: Good. Estaba tan cansada. What if you wanted to say we were so tired that we slept all day? So,
   first bit is we were so tired, let’s be a masculine or mixed group, we were so tired:
Student: Estábamos tan cansado- cansados.
Teacher: Good. Estábamos tan cansados, that we slept all day. So what is this that?
Student: Que.
Teacher: Que. Estábamos tan cansados que we slept all day. Now, all day is “all the day”, you remember
   how is day?
Student: Día.
Teacher: Día. And the day:
Student: La día.
Teacher: It would be, but-
Student: El día.
Teacher: El día. It ends in a, but it’s masculine. So, all day is “all the day”, how would it be?
Student: Toda-
Teacher: It’s masculine.
Student: Todo el día.
Teacher: We were so tired that we slept all day, we were so tired that we slept all day:
Student: Estábamos tan cansados que dormimos todo el día.
Teacher: Very good. Estábamos tan cansados que dormimos todo el día. So dormimos could be we slept
   or we sleep, we know it’s the same in the present, but estábamos tan cansados gives us our
   context, so we understand that of course it refers to past, estábamos tan cansados que dormimos
   todo el día. How would you say we were so tired when we arrived that we slept all day? So, we
   were so tired:
Student: Estábamos tan cansados.
Teacher: When we arrived:
Student: Cuando llegamos.
Teacher: That we slept all day:
Student: Que dormimos todo el día.
Teacher: Good. Estábamos tan cansados cuando llegamos que dormimos todo el día. So, here in this
   sentence we have llegamos and dormimos that could be past or present, but estábamos brings us
   into the context right from the beginning, estábamos tan cansados cuando llegamos que
   dormimos todo el día. So, we said that when was:
Student: Cuándo.
Teacher: Cuándo. And how much is cuánto, with a t, cuánto.
Student: Cuánto.
Teacher: Cuánto. How do you say again, like another time?
Student: Otra vez.
Teacher: Otra vez. Good. So, you could say how many times, how would that be? How many times:
Student: Cuántos veces- Cuántas veces?
Teacher: Cuántas veces. Good. We know it’s feminine, because we said otra vez, and not otro vez. So, we
   can, if we have a word like vez where it’s not obvious what is the gender, we need to look back to
   somewhere that we used it – otra vez, oh, ok, it’s feminine, cuántas veces, good. How would you
   say I don’t know how many times I visited him? I don’t know how many times I visited him:
Student: No sé cuántas veces.
Teacher: I visited him:
Student: Lo visité.
Teacher: No sé cuántas veces lo visité. I don’t know how many times they visited him, I don’t know how
   many times they visited him:
Student: No sé cuántas veces los visitaron- oh, him- lo visitaron.
Teacher: Good. No sé cuántas veces lo visitaron. And what if you wanted to say I don’t know how many
   times they visited her?
Student: No sé cuántas veces la visitaron.
Teacher: Good. No sé cuántas veces la visitaron.
Spanish Track 69
Teacher: So now we have a panorama of times in Spanish. We’ve seen all of the different times. We can
  find will, would, the present, the pasts, the have tenses. Maybe some of these we are clearer on
  than others, but we’ve learned how to find what we might think we don’t know and how to analyze
  the language, so that through listening to Spanish we can reinforce the language that we’ve learned
  and bring it to the surface and pick up again anything that we might have forgotten along the way.
  But there is one more tense to learn in Spanish. One more very important tense in Spanish, and
  personally it’s my favorite thing about Spanish. In Spanish we have what we can call a mood tense,
  the subjunctive tense in grammatical terminology, but we will call it the mood tense because it’s a
  tense that just shows mood. Now, you might be interested to hear that we also have it in English.
  Now, we don’t use it as much in English as we do in Spanish but it is there. For example, in English
  you can say it is important that you are here or it is important that you be here. So, it’s important
  that you are here sounds more everyday, let’s say, more casual. It’s important that you be here;
  that gives us a different feeling. It feels more serious, it feels more imperative. How are we
  achieving that feeling? We’re using be instead of you are. We are using you be. It’s important that
  you be here. Another example of how English uses this mood, I might say had I gone, I would
  know. Had I gone, I would know. Now, had I, that inversion of I had to had I usually is to make a
  question. Had you gone already? for example. But here it’s not a question. Had I gone, I would
  know. Here we are creating a mood tense. We are saying if I had gone with had I gone. We also
  say not only is it, for example, not only is it a problem, it’s the biggest problem. Not only is it,
  again, is it is what we do to make a question. But here it’s not a question. Not only is it a problem,
  it’s the biggest problem. So the changing of the order of is and it gives us this mood tense here in
  English as well. So we don’t need to analyze too much how it works in English, because there’s
  not so much correlation between English and Spanish about how it works. It’s used much more
  extensively in Spanish. But the idea is not completely alien to us. In Spanish, it’s a very common
  thing that will allow you and oblige you to perceive and to express the world in a certain way.
  Now, to form the mood tense, to form the subjunctive tense in Spanish, is very easy, and we don’t
  need to learn any new sounds to do it. All we do is we switch between the verbs. With –ar verbs
  we will use the –er/-ir endings, and with –er/-ir verbs we will use the –ar verb endings. And that’s
  how we build this tense. So, for example, how is to speak?
Student: Hablar.
Teacher: And how is he speaks?
Student: Hablá.
Teacher: Habla.
Student: Sorry, habla. Habla.
Teacher: Habla. Good. The accent there at the beginning. Habla. Now if you want to make this the mood
  tense, we will switch groups. We we will switch groups. Verbs from the –ar group use –er/-ir
  endings, and verbs from the -er/-ir group use –ar endings. So how would you make habla in the
  mood tense?
Student: Hable.
Teacher: Hable. Good. So you have they speak:
Student: Hablan.
Teacher: Hablan. And the mood tense version will be?
Student: Hablen.
Teacher: Hablen. Good. How is I speak?
Student: Hablo.
Teacher: Hablo. Of course if we go from hablo in the –ar group and we go to -er/-ir we will still have
  hablo. We will change an o for an o. So we don’t do that. Hablo will also become hable. So again
  we have a situation where I jumps in with he, she, it, and you (formal). So hable can also be the
  mood tense for I. What is we speak?
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. And the mood tense of we speak:
Student: Hablemos.
Teacher: Hablemos. Good. We are using the /e/, not that odd i that pops up with the –ir verbs in the present
   like vivimos, salimos. -emos for the mood tense. Hablemos. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. I eat:
Student: Como.
Teacher: Como. But the mood tense version would be?
Student: Coma.
Teacher: Good. Coma. And what else can coma mean, then?
Student: He/she/it version of the mood tense.
Teacher: Good, and you (formal). Very good. They eat, normal tense, present tense?
Student: Comen.
Teacher: Comen. And the mood tense?
Student: Coman.
Teacher: Coman. Good. So it’s going to be great to practice this mood tense, because of course you have to
   first think what the verb should be, and then you switch it. So we’re going to have a nice practice
   mentally, in our mental exercises, of the tenses that we already learned whilst we are building the
   mood tense. So the use of the mood tense we can divide between obligatory and optional. There
   are some situations in which we absolutely must use the mood tense, otherwise it will be
   considered an error. It will sound incorrect and distract from what we are saying. And then there
   are cases where the use of the mood tense is optional. You can use it to give a different meaning
   or a different flavor or a different feeling, which is the much more exciting area, where it’s
   optional. But the obligatory uses will allow us a very important exposure to the feeling of the mood
   tense. So now we’re going to look at some examples. In English when you say I want you to wait,
   I want you to wait, this is quite a peculiar structure in English. And it’s not really translated in this
   way in many other languages. I want you to wait. In most other Romance languages, at least, it’s
   translated as I want that you wait. This is how we would say it in French or Portuguese or Italian.
   So I want you to wait is I want that you wait. Now, this you wait is going to be in the mood tense.
   When we are expressing what we want in this way, we will use the mood tense. We are putting
   our subjectivity onto the world when we say I want that and following this that, we will use the
   mood tense. So how would you say I want you to wait? I want that you wait (informally):
Student: So I want remains the same and it’s quiero. That is que. And then you wait becomes espere.
   Sorry, esperes.
Teacher: Good. All together, I want that you wait:
Student: Quiero que esperes.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que esperes. Ah? So if you say quiero que esperas, here it would be considered
   an error. This is an obligatory use of the subjunctive, of the mood tense. Quiero que esperes. I
   want you to wait for him, or I want you to wait for it:
Student: Quiero que lo esperes.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que lo esperes. I want you to wait for it or for him. Very good. Do you want me to
   wait? So first let’s find the in-between sentence. Give it to me in English, how we will say it in
   Spanish. Do you want me to wait?:
Student: Do you want that I wait for you?
Teacher: You made it more complicated. It’s just do you want that I wait? But, let’s put it. So do you want
   me to wait for you? Give me that one. Do you want me to wait for you? And let’s speak informally.
Student: ¿Quieres que te espere?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Quieres que te espere? And of course this could mean: Do you want me to wait for
   you? Do you want him to wait for you? Do you want her to wait for you? So if we wanted to clarify
   I, how would we do that? Do you want me to wait for you?:
Student: ¿Quieres que yo te espere?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Quieres que yo te espere?
 Spanish Track 70
Teacher: What was the word for what?
Student: Qué.
Teacher: Qué. What, when it’s not a question, is lo que, lo que.
Student: Lo que.
Teacher: For example, if you want to say I saw what you’re doing, this is not a question, no? I saw what
   you’re doing. Here, the what is not a question. Here it’s lo que. I cooked what they’re eating. I
   cooked what they’re eating. Here, what is not a question, no? Yo cociné, I cooked, lo que comen,
   or lo que están comiendo if we mean right now. So, what not as a question is lo que. How would
   you say I don’t want you to speak about what we spoke about - but you know we don’t need this
   about. So the first bit is I don’t want you to speak, and let’s speak informally. I don’t want you to
   speak, I don’t want that you speak:
Student: No quiero que hables.
Teacher: Very good. No quiero que hables. About:
Student: Is it de?
Teacher: De, you could use, or you could use?
Student: Sobre.
Teacher: Sobre. Good. So, no quiero que hables de, or sobre what we spoke about, and we can just say
   what we spoke:
Student: Lo que hablamos.
Teacher: Yes. It’s the same in the past. So give it to me now all together. I don’t want you to speak about
   what we spoke about. From the beginning and thinking it through again.
Student: No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos.
Teacher: Good. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos, or no quiero que hables de lo que
   hablamos. Good. But that sentence could be ambiguous, no? I mean, in your mind, when you’re
   creating this sentence you will have the context very strongly in your mind that you’re thinking
   about what we spoke about the other day. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the person
   receiving it has that same context in their mind. They might, depends what your conversation is
   about. But if you don’t have a context that’s shared, it could be ambiguous. You could understand
   I don’t want you to speak about what we speak about generally. Because of course we have
   hablamos, which can be past or present. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos.
   Generally. So there’s two ways here that you could clarify. You could add something like the other
   day, el otro día. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos el otro día. So you are showing
   with some time expression that it was past. Or you could use the line in the past. What we were
   speaking about. Because here it’s interchangeable, the meaning changes so slightly and both
   meanings are fine, no? If we look at English, I don’t want you to speak about what we were
   speaking about. I don’t want you to speak about what we spoke about. So maybe here in Spanish
   you choose the line in the past just so it’s obvious that you’re talking about the past. So let’s give
   it another go, using the line in the past. I don’t want you to speak about what we were speaking
   about. I don’t want you to speak (informally still):
Student: No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablábamos.
Teacher: Very good. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablábamos. Necessity in Spanish is – do you
   remember what to do with -ity words to make them Spanish?
Student: -idad.
Teacher: Good. So necessity becomes:
Student: Necesidad.
Teacher: Necesidad. To need is necesitar.
Student: Necesitar.
Teacher: Good. How would you say I need?
Student: Necesito.
Teacher: Necesito. I need you to prepare it. Let’s speak formally. I need you to prepare it (formally):
Student: In English again it would be I need that you prepare it.
Teacher: Exactly.
Student: Necesito que lo prepare.
Teacher: Very good. Necesito que lo prepare. This is to you, formally. If you wanted to make it clear that
   you are speaking to you and not speaking about him or her, how would you do that here? I need
   you to prepare it:
Student: Necesito que usted lo prepare.
Teacher: Very good. Necesito que usted lo prepare. Necesito que lo prepare usted. Very good. So with
   quiero que, necesito que, we’re seeing two things that they have in common. We have a verb like
   quiero, necesito, a verb that’s showing what we want to occur in the world, expressing our
   subjectivity, let’s say, in this way, and we have the structural similarity that the mood tense is
   coming after que. To be short of, to be short of, to be missing, to lack, is faltar. Quite
   uncomfortable translations, but this is a very common verb in Spanish. Faltar. It’s used very often,
   this verb in Spanish. For example, you could say I need you to prepare what’s missing. I need you
   to prepare what’s missing. What’s left over, what we need to do still, ah? So again, formally, I
   need you to prepare:
Student: Necesito que prepare.
Teacher: Good. What’s missing.
Student: Lo que falta.
Teacher: Necesito que prepare lo que falta. And lo que because the what here is not a question. Very good.
   The noun is also used quite often. The noun is falta, la falta. So falta means lack, lack. So if I say
   falta de consideración, what does it mean? Falta de consideración:
Student: Oh, right. Lack of consideration.
Teacher: Good. Lack of consideration. It’s also used with respect, falta de respeto, lack of respect. And it’s
   also used in the expression hace falta. “It makes lack.” “It makes lack.” Which is just another way
   of saying it’s necessary, but it’s very common. And hace falta que of course is followed by this
   mood tense in the same way that we do with quiero que, necesito que, we will follow it with this
   mood tense. So, if you wanted to say, using hace falta, it is necessary that we eat soon, what was
   the word for soon?
Student: Is it pronto, or is that Italian?
Teacher: That’s it. In Italian, actually, it means ready, pronto. This is why when Italians answer the phone,
   they say pronto, because historically, let’s say, there was an operator there connecting the wires.
   And they were there going ready? Are you ready? Is it ready? Can you hear me? But in Spanish
   it’s soon. Like the British slang. People say in England get here pronto, get here soon. So it makes
   lack, hace falta, it makes lack that we eat soon:
Student: Sorry, can you explain again how, why does that make sense? It makes lack that we eat soon?
Teacher: It makes lack would be the literal translation, but literal translations are often uncomfortable, no?
   Especially when we’re talking about fixed expressions. So hace falta is an extremely common
   expression, quite difficult to translate comfortably. Just another way of saying it’s necessary. So
   it makes lack or hace falta that we eat soon. How would it be?
Student: Hace falta que comamos pronto.
Teacher: Hace falta que comamos pronto. So hace falta you will hear around a lot, and falta as a noun,
   you will hear it especially in phrases like falta de respeto, a lack of respect, you hear that a lot.
   And faltar as a verb, to lack, or to be missing is also very useful. To prefer in Spanish is preferir.
   Preferir.
Student: Preferir.
Teacher: Preferir. How is I prefer?
Student: Prefero.
Teacher: It should be.
Student: Prefiero.
Teacher: Better. Prefiero. Good. So again if you say I prefer him to stay, you’re not going to say I prefer
   him to stay, we will say I prefer that he stays, and what are we going to do with he stays? I think
   you’re getting the gist now.
Student: Mood tense.
Teacher: Mood tense. So it’s not just the structures that we are identifying, it’s the feeling. This is very
   important for the mood tense. What you want to really get your head around is the feeling of the
   mood tense, so you can start experimenting about where you would use it and listening out for
   where you hear people using it. I prefer that he stays, I prefer for him to stay, I prefer that he stays:
Student: Prefiero que se queda. Sorry, quede.
Teacher: Good. Prefiero que se quede. I prefer them to stay, I prefer for them to stay:
Student: Prefiero que se queden.
Teacher: Prefiero que se queden. I prefer that they don’t stay here. I prefer that they don’t stay here. I
   prefer for them not to stay here:
Student: Prefiero que se – que no se queden aquí.
Teacher: Good. Prefiero que no se queden aquí. Very good. How would you say I prefer you to give it to
   him? I prefer you, speaking informally, to give it to him:
Student: So it's I prefer that you give it to him?
Teacher: Exactly.
Student: Prefiero que lo le – ah, se lo des.
Teacher: That’s it. Good. Prefiero que se lo des. So this could mean I prefer you to give it to him, to her,
   how would we clarify it? If we want to show it’s to him. I prefer you to give it to him:
Student: Prefiero que se lo des a él.
Teacher: Very good. And what if it was to her?
Student: A ella. Prefiero que se lo des a ella.
Teacher: Good. Prefiero que se lo des a ella. Very good. So to clarify we can then say a él, a ella, to show
   afterwards who we meant with se.
Spanish Track 71
Teacher: To count in Spanish is contar, contar.
Student: Contar.
Teacher: Contar. We can see that it’s the same word, but it’s also to recount, like in English how you say
  to recount a story. So, contar, you can also use it like to tell, especially with telling stories. How
  would you say I tell?
Student: I’m tempted to say cuento.
Teacher: Cuento, you would be correct, cuento, good, the o splits. So, cuento is I tell, and cuento is the
  noun, meaning story, un cuento is a story. So, we can see how contar is to count, but also to
  recount or another verb for to tell. C-o-n-t-a-r. So, how would you say I want you to tell me, I want
  you to recount to me (informally)?
Student: Quiero que me cuentes.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que me cuentes. I want you to tell me something and speaking plurally now,
  speaking to more than one you:
Student: Quiero que me cuenten algo.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que me cuenten algo. To count on, to count on, in the sense of you can count on
  me, to count on is contar con, so, “to count with” in Spanish. So, how would you say I want you
  to count on me? I want you to count on me (speaking informally):
Student: Quiero que cuentes con mi- conmigo.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que cuentes conmigo. Good. I want you to count on me. Quiero que cuentes
  conmigo. Very good. So, we said that sometimes, between English and Spanish, that the
  prepositions might change, we say to count on in English and in Spanish to count with. We also
  spoke about how we can use the negative language transfer of Spanish speakers speaking English,
  that may make some mistake and we can make certain assumptions about Spanish through that.
  So, maybe we hear a native Spanish speaker speaking English, saying you can count with me, and
  if we hear that a couple of times we can understand that that’s probably how it’s said in Spanish.
   So, we can take advantage of any negative language transfer we may hear from Spanish speakers
   in English. What was to wait or to hope?
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: Esperar. So, if you say I hope that, then of course you will also follow this up with our mood
   tense. So, how would you say I hope that you count on me (informally)?
Student: Espero que cuentes conmigo.
Teacher: Good. Espero que cuentes conmigo. I hope that you count on me. Good. How would you say We
   hope that they count on Maria? We hope that they count on Maria:
Student: Esperamos que cuenten con María.
Teacher: Good. Esperamos que cuenten con María. We hope that they count on Maria. What if you wanted
   to say we hope that they tell Maria it, using contar? So now we’re using contar, to count, like to
   recount, we hope that they recount it to Maria, we hope that they tell it to Maria:
Student: Esperamos que lo cuenten a María.
Teacher: Very good. Esperamos que lo cuenten a María. So, here we have the other meaning of contar,
   to recount, to tell. What was to see?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Ver. So, if we say, for example, we hope that they see Maria, what is they see in the present?
Student: Ven.
Teacher: Ven. Now, if you want to make the mood tense and you switch to the other side you would get
   “van”, which would probably cause, especially in the optional uses of the mood tense, a lot of
   confusion, because “van” sounds like-
Student: Like they are going.
Teacher: Yes, so, we actually build the mood tense on the I form, which was the only irregular form of ver
   in the present. Do you remember how to say I see?
Student: Veo.
Teacher: Veo. So, we kept the e. So, the mood tense is based on this version to avoid any ambiguity that
  might be caused with va, vas, van. So, how would you say I hope that they see, I hope that they
  see:
Student: Espero que vean.
Teacher: Good. Espero que vean. Now, if you want to say I hope that they see Maria, we will say a María.
  Now the literal translation doesn’t make any sense: I hope that they see to Maria. In Spanish we
  have this personal a, that we use when we are referring to somebody that we are doing the action
  of the verb to. So, in this case the person that we are doing the action of seeing to, espero que
  vean a María. The reason for this is that the order in Spanish is quite flexible, words like María
  can come before the verb or after the verb, which might cause confusion about whether Maria is
  doing or being done to, whether David is doing or being done to. So, when it’s being done to, we
  include this a, and when there is not any other preposition there that shows us that we are doing it
  to, so we saw already, for example, contar con María, there we don’t need the a, but if there is
  no other preposition we will have to put that a. So, let’s practice this. What is to understand?
Student: Comprender.
Teacher: Comprender. So, how would you say, I hope that you, speaking informally, I hope that you
  understand David? David. I hope that you understand David:
Student: Espero que comprendas a David.
Teacher: Good. Espero que comprendas a David. How would you say the same sentence speaking
  formally? I hope that you, formally, I hope that you understand David:
Student: Espero que comprenda a David.
Teacher: Good. Espero que comprenda a David. Now, we can see why this a is important, because if it
  weren’t there, if we were to say espero que comprenda David, it would sound like I hope that
  David understands, because David is flexible: espero que David comprenda, espero que
  comprenda David would both mean I hope that David understands. So, to make it clear, this habit
  formed in Spanish of putting the a there. For example, the word for man was? Begins with a silent
  h.
Student: Hombre.
Teacher: Hombre. The man:
Student: El hombre.
Teacher: El hombre. If you say to the man, “a el hombre”, a and el, they stick together and they form al,
   and it’s written like this: a-l, al hombre. So, if you were to say I want him to see the man, I want
   that he sees the man, I want that he sees to the man, so how would that be?
Student: Quiero que va-
Teacher: We go from veo, to avoid that ambiguity.
Student: Vea. Quiero que vea al hombre.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que vea al hombre. But if you were to say: I want the man to see, I want that the
   man sees:
Student: Quiero que el hombre vea.
Teacher: Quiero que el hombre vea. Or quiero que vea el hombre. So, because the order is flexible, we
   can’t just put el hombre afterwards and understand from that I want that he sees the man. If we
   put el hombre afterwards we will still understand I want that the man sees. So, we need to say al
   hombre. What was I like, it pleases me?
Student: Me gusta.
Teacher: Me gusta. So, you could say I like that the teacher visits, and here we will use the mood tense after
   I like that, because again you are casting your subjectivity onto the world and you show that with
   this mood tense. I like that the teacher visits. The teacher, we say the professor, so how is that?
Student: El profesor.
Teacher: Good, or for female, for feminine?
Student: La profesora.
Teacher: Very good. So, either one. I like that the teacher visits:
Student: Me gusta que la profesora visite.
Teacher: Very good. Me gusta que la profesora visite or me gusta que visite la profesora, the order is
   flexible. Now, if you wanted to say I like that she visits the teacher, how would that be?
Student: Me gusta que visite la profesora.
Teacher: So I still understand from this sentence: I like that the teacher visits, because the order, the word
   order is not changing the information for us, because the word order is flexible. So, me gusta que
   visite la profesora, I like that the teacher visits. But, if we want to make it understood I like that
   he visits the teacher, how are we going to clear that up?
Student: Me gusta que visite a la profesora.
Teacher: Good. Me gusta que visite a la profesora. Very good. So, to clarify, it’s not just when there might
   be some ambiguity that we have to use this personal a, we always need to use this a when the
   human that we mention is having the action of the verb done to them and there is no other
   preposition present. Now, I say the human, not a human, because it’s when we refer to a specific
   person, and whilst this personal a is generally used with humans, we might also see it as a way of
   personifying non-humans, so some people use it with pets, for example, or it can be used in some
   creative ways, for example, a la muerte, escapar a la muerte, to escape death, and using this
   personal a in this expression personifies death, but generally speaking, we will use it with humans,
   and with specific humans, when we are referring to a specific person. So, for example, I need to
   find the plumber – there we would use the personal a, I need to find a plumber – there we wouldn’t.
   So, it’s important to listen out for it and to analyze, when you hear it, to understand why it was
   used, and this is the way we internalize this kind of quite specific details that we find in language.
   And the reason why I keep stressing the importance of listening is to practice this thinking process,
   to practice analyzing the language and becoming our own teachers. This is how language becomes
   something fascinating and pleasant to learn instead of frustrating and painful.
 Spanish Track 72
Teacher: Another place where we use this mood tense is when we are giving orders to each other, most of
   the time, with just one exception which we will look at, we are using this mood tense to give
   orders. For example, if you wanted to say informally don’t speak, you will just say you don’t speak,
   but you will put it in this mood tense. So, how would you say that, don’t speak?
Student: No hables.
Teacher: No hables. Good. Don’t speak. No hables. How would you say don’t stay, don’t stay, still speaking
   informally, so you need to say you don’t stay, and then you just switch the ending. So, let’s build
   it up together, how do you say you don’t stay?
Student: No te quedas.
Teacher: No te quedas. So, this is you don’t stay. But, if you want to make this don’t stay, then you will use
   this mood tense.
Student: No te quedes.
Teacher: No te quedes. And then it sounds like Don’t stay! No te quedes. Don’t stay here:
Student: No te quedes aquí.
Teacher: Good. No te quedes aquí. The word for there is ahí, ahí, spelled a-h-í, and there also exists allí,
   spelled with double l, there’s a tiny, even imperceivable difference between ahí a-h-í and allí a-l-
   l-i. How would you say don’t stay there, informally?
Student: No te quedes ahí.
Teacher: Good. No te quedes ahí. Good. How would you say don’t give it, speaking informally? Don't give
   it:
Student: No des… No lo des.
Teacher: No lo des. Don’t give it to him:
Student: No lo des a él.
Teacher: Now, if you put a él it’s going to be for clarification purposes, in which case it will be a repetition
   of something else.
Student: No se lo des.
Teacher: No se lo des. Good. No se lo des. Don't give it to him. What if you wanted to show, clarify or
   emphasize that it’s to him?
Student: No se lo des a él.
Teacher: Good. No se lo des a él. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. Now, speaking to more than one person, how would you say: Eat! How would you tell
   more than one person to eat?
Student: Coman.
Teacher: Coman. Good. So, how would you say: Wait!, talking to more than one person?
Student: Esperen.
Teacher: Good. Esperen. Now, if you want to say Wait for me, we know already we don’t use for, we just
   say me, me. With positive commands, when you’re telling somebody to do something rather than
   not to do something, we have these little words like me or lo, breaking the rules that we learned
   so far about their position – they will come after the changed verb, only with positive commands.
   This helps our ear tune into the fact that it’s a command. Because other than that vowel changing,
   which is a very small change which might be quite hard to pick up audibly, we also have these
   small little words like me or lo coming after the verb and that also helps our ear tune into the fact
   that it’s a command. So, if you want to say to this more than one person, to this plural you, wait
   for me, await me, how will it sound?
Student: Espérenme.
Teacher: Espérenme. Good. And it’s written like one word as well. Espérenme. How would you say wait
   for it, or wait for him, still to more than one person?
Student: Espérenlo.
Teacher: Espérenlo. Wait for them:
Student: Espérenlos.
Teacher: Espérenlos. But, if you were to say don’t wait for them, then we don’t have it on the end, this is a
   negative command. So, don’t wait for them, still to more than one person:
Student: No los esperen.
Teacher: Very good. No los esperen. How would you say, speaking formally, eat:
Student: Coma.
Teacher: Coma. Good. Eat it:
Student: Cómalo.
Teacher: Cómalo. Good, so we have the lo on the end, but if you were to say don’t eat it, still speaking
   formally:
Student: No lo coma.
Teacher: Good. No lo coma. And speaking informally?
Student: No lo comas.
Teacher: No lo comas. And speaking to more than one person?
Student: No lo coman.
Teacher: No lo coman. But, if we wanted to say eat it, speaking to more than one person, positive command,
   eat it:
Student: Cómanlo.
Teacher: Cómanlo. Very good. To forget was olvidar, olvidar.
Student: Olvidar.
Teacher: Olvidar. Related to oblivion in English actually, oblivion means like a state of complete forgetting,
   so we can see the connection there between oblivion and olvidar. Olvidar – to forget. Or
   olvidarse, either, it can be either because olvidar is a verb where we need to say what is being
   forgotten, we need to say it, so if we use it we have no problem, lo olvido, but if we want to just
   say I forget, then we have a problem, because we are not saying what, so we need to say I forget
   myself, me olvido, so it’s a verb that doesn’t like to be alone. So, how would you say forget it,
   speaking formally, forget it:
Student: Olvídelo.
Teacher: Olvídelo. Good. Now, if you just want to say forget, and we don’t want to say it, this verb
   doesn’t like to be alone, so there we would say forget yourself, so how would this be, still
   formally:
Student: Olvídese.
Teacher: Very good. Olvídese. How would you say don’t forget it, speaking informally, don’t forget it?
Student: No lo olvides.
Teacher: Good. No lo olvides. But, if we don’t want to put the lo, we can just say don't forget yourself, don’t
   forget, so how would that be?
Student: No te olvides.
Teacher: Good. No te olvides. Or we could do both, we could say no te lo olvides, we could put both, no
   te lo olvides. How would you say to more than one person don’t forget, you guys don’t forget?
Student: No se olviden.
Teacher: Good. No se olviden. Don’t forget it, still to plural:
Student: No lo olviden.
Teacher: No lo olviden. Good. Or no se lo olviden, you could put them both, meaning doesn’t really change.
   How would you say let’s not forget it, how do you think that would be? Let’s not forget it:
Student: No lo olvidemos.
Teacher: Good. No lo olvidemos. No lo olvidemos. But if you didn’t want to say it, and you just wanted to
   say let’s not forget, how would you say it?
Student: No nos olvidemos.
Teacher: No nos olvidemos. Good. What was to buy?
Student: Comprar.
Teacher: Comprar. How would you say, to more than one person, buy what is missing, what lacks, what is
   necessary? So, what was this missing, lacks, necessary verb?
Student: Faltar.
Teacher: Good. Faltar. So, speaking to more than one person, buy what is missing, what is necessary, what
   lacks:
Student: Compren que- que lo.
Teacher: Lo que.
Student: Compren lo que falta.
Teacher: Good. Compren lo que falta. You could also say compren lo que hace falta, buy what is making
   lack, you will hear that as well. So, we are using the mood tense to make commands, with one
   exception. The one exception is with positive informal commands. So, what that means is when
   we are speaking informally and we are telling somebody to do something, rather than not to do
   something. The reason why we don’t use the mood tense here is because we want a shortcut, it’s
   what we do most, to tell people informally what to do. If you think about it, all day you are saying
   wait here, buy this, call me later, do that and the other, it’s such common speech that it seemed a
   bit heavy to use the mood tense for this. So, Spanish took a shortcut, and the shortcut is just
   dropping the s of the you form of the verb. So, for example, we have comprar, to buy. You buy,
   informally, is:
Student: Compras.
Teacher: Compras. Now, to make the order, the positive order, we just drop the s and we get:
Student: Compra.
Teacher: Compra.
Student: Which is the same as the he/she/it-
Teacher: It’s the same as the he/she/it form, but it will never cause really any ambiguity for two reasons.
   Firstly, your tone of voice when you are making an order, the context is always very present, and
   also because we’ll be putting our small words, like lo, me, la, after the verb, with the positive
   orders at least, so it’s very obviously an order. But we want to think it through this way, that we
   are taking off the s, so we keep the association with you informal. So, we have to buy, comprar;
   you buy, informally, compras; then we want to make an order, which is “get rid of the s”, and we
   say compra. How would you say buy it, talking informally?
Student: Cómpralo.
Teacher: Cómpralo. Buy me it:
Student: Cómpramelo.
Teacher: Cómpramelo. Good. What was to forget?
Student: Olvidar.
Teacher: Olvidar. How would you say forget it, talking informally?
Student: Olvida.
Teacher: Good, but we need to say what we are forgetting with this one.
Student: Olvídalo.
Teacher: Olvídalo. And if we don’t want to say the lo, we can say:
Student: Olvídate.
Teacher: Olvídate. Good. What was to eat?
Student: Comer.
Teacher: Comer. Let’s say eat it, informally:
Student: Cómelo.
Teacher: Cómelo. Good. But, don’t eat it, still informally:
Student: No lo come.
Teacher: So, it’s just the positive commands that we have this shortcut, when we go to negative, we want to
   use the mood tense.
Student: No lo comas.
Teacher: No lo comas. Good. How would you say eat it, speaking formally? Formally:
Student: Cómalo.
Teacher: Cómalo. Good. Don’t eat it, still formally:
Student: No lo coma.
Teacher: No lo coma. Good. Eat it, speaking plurally, to more than one person, eat it:
Student: Cómanlo.
Teacher: Good. Cómanlo. Don’t eat it:
Student: No lo coman.
Teacher: No lo coman. Very good. What was to sell?
Student: Vender.
Teacher: Vender. Sell it, speaking informally:
Student: Véndelo.
Teacher: Véndelo. Good. But, don’t sell it:
Student: No lo vendas.
Teacher: No lo vendas. So, our shortcut is dropping the s of the present for the positive commands, which
   are informal, it’s something that’s quite specific, positive commands informally, but it’s something
   that we do all day and that should help us remember that we have this shortcut for it. Callar, c-a-
   l-l-a-r, callar, means to quiet, and callarse, callarse, means to shut up. So, how would you tell
   somebody to shut up, informally?
Student: Cállate.
Teacher: Cállate. Good. Quiet yourself. Good.
Student: So is it as polite as be quiet, or is it really shut up?
Teacher: No, it’s not very polite. If you were to speak to more than one person, how would you say it?
Student: “Cállente”, sorry, cállense.
Teacher: Cállense, good, now we need the mood tense. Cállense. Very good.
 Spanish Track 73
Teacher: So we’ve seen how with orders we want to use this mood tense, with the exception of positive
  orders which are informal. There we have a shortcut, we can just cut off the s of the informal form.
  For example, what is to wait?
Student: Esperar.
Teacher: And what is you wait, informally?
Student: Esperas.
Teacher: Esperas. And wait, the order:
Student: Espera.
Teacher: Espera. That’s our shortcut. How would you say let’s wait?
Student: Esperemos.
Teacher: Esperemos. Good. And you can also say esperamos, it just sounds less like an order. It would
  sound more like shall we wait? ¿Esperamos? Shall we wait? But then the order, esperemos. Let’s
  not wait:
Student: No esperemos.
Teacher: No esperemos. Good. So orders, we are using with you, the different versions of you, and with we.
  But maybe I want to say what I want him to do, or what I want her to do, or what I want them to
  do. Other than the structures that we learned already, quiero que, prefiero que, etc, we can just
  say que and follow it with the subjunctive. So for example, maybe you tell me David is waiting
  for you and I say que espere. Que espere. That he waits, but I’m using this mood tense so I’m
  saying let him wait. Let him wait. Que espere. Maybe I really want the show to finish. I want the
  show to hurry up and finish. I can say que, it finishes in the mood tense and then I get that meaning
  of let it finish. Hurry up and finish. So how would I say that? Let it finish:
Student: Que termine.
Teacher: Que termine. Good. Que termine. We said that the word for already was ya. And we can use that
   here, so let it finish already:
Student: Que termine ya.
Teacher: Que termine ya. Enough already. We said that callarse was to quiet oneself or to shut up. So
   maybe you want somebody to shut up. You’re not angry enough to tell them directly. Maybe you
   will just say oh, let them, let him shut up. Let him quiet himself. How would that be?
Student: Que se calle.
Teacher: Good. Que se calle. Another situation that we use the mood tense in, is when after the word
   cuando, we refer to the future. For example, if I say when we speak and I mean generally, how
   will it sound?
Student: Cuando hablamos.
Teacher: Cuando hablamos. So this is generally, when we speak generally and you could continue, no?
   But, if you mean in a future event, when we speak later on, then you will use this mood tense. Now
   this is a very interesting use of the mood tense because it highlights some kind of superstition
   maybe that the language is uncomfortable with referring to something in the future that didn’t
   happen yet as a fact. So you’re putting this mood tense there to kind of highlight that subjectivity.
   Give me when we speak then. When we speak, and we mean the future. When we speak:
Student: Cuando hablemos.
Teacher: Cuando hablemos. We are using this mood tense because we are referring to something that’s
   going to happen in the future that we give it as a fact. And it’s like who are we as mere mortals to
   do such a thing, to refer to this event or to this fact that will be. So for example, you could say
   when we eat together, we speak. And you mean generally. When we eat together, we speak. What
   was together? Related to junction, related to joint? Related to what in English they say military
   junta.
Student: Junta.
Teacher: So how would you say when we eat together, we speak? When we eat together, we speak:
Student: Cuando comemos junta.
Teacher: Junta is the version you found through military junta, but you are not just going to take it, you are
   going to have to process it as well. When we eat together:
Student: Juntas.
   For two females, that’s fine. So cuando comemos juntas. We speak:
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Good. All together. When we eat together, we speak:
Student: Cuando comemos juntas, hablamos.
Teacher: Good. Cuando comemos juntas, hablamos. So here you’re speaking generally, generalmente,
   generally. When we eat together, we speak, but if you want to say when we eat together and you’re
   referring to the future. A fact that you’re naming that hasn’t happened yet, there you want to use
   your mood tense. So let’s work our way through it. When we eat together, and we’re referring to
   the future:
Student: Cuando comamos juntas.
Teacher: We will speak, and we don’t need will with we will speak because the when we eat together is a
   future context. We can just go back to normal everyday present again.
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Good. Cuando comamos juntas (two females) when we eat together, hablamos, we will speak.
   Now hablamos is just normal present because it is not directly connected to cuando and we have
   future context already so we can just use hablamos. So if we compare these two sentences, the
   only difference is in that mood tense. Cuando comemos juntos, hablamos. This means generally.
   I went back to male or mixed group. Cuando comemos juntos, hablamos, generally. Cuando
   comamos juntos, hablamos. When we eat together, we will speak. What is I go or I’m going?
Student: Voy.
Teacher: Voy. Now you could probably guess that the mood tense of voy and va and vamos is irregular. So
  the root is vaya, v-a-y-a, vaya. And then we add on our consonants if we need them, so for example
  the they form or the you plural form would be?
Student: Vayan.
Teacher: Vayan. We form:
Student: Vayamos.
  Vayamos. Good. So how would you say we see her when we go, and you’re speaking generally?
  We see her:
Student: La vemos.
Teacher: La vemos. When we go, generally speaking:
Student: Cuando vamos.
Teacher: Good. La vemos cuando vamos. But, if we want to say we will see her when we go, and we’re
  referring to the future, not generally. We will see her when we go. How will that be? So, we will
  see her, we can just use the present because when we go is the future context. So, again how is we
  will see her?
Student: La vemos.
Teacher: Good. When we go, and we refer now to the future with when we go:
Student: Cuando vayamos.
Teacher: Good. La vemos cuando vayamos. So, we have la vemos cuando vamos generally, la vemos
  cuando vayamos in the future.
Spanish Track 74
Teacher: So we’ve been seeing the obligatory uses of the mood tense and we will continue to look at some
   of these uses. To choose is elegir. Elegir.
Student: Elegir.
Teacher: Which sounds a little bit like:
Student: Elect.
Teacher: Yes, elect. Related to elect. Election in Spanish is elección. I choose from elegir is elijo, elijo. So
   what happened there?
Student: The /e/ became /i/.
Teacher: Yes, the e or the /e/ sound became an i or an /i/ sound. So instead of splitting, this e just turns into
   an i. And that happens sometimes in Spanish with a few verbs. When we stress the e, instead of
   splitting it will just turn into an i. So here we have elijo. And this just when we stress it. So how
   would you say we choose from elegir?
Student: Elegimos.
Teacher: Elegimos. Good. So there the e is not turning into an i because we are not stressing it. Elegimos.
   But in the other places where we stress it, it will. So we have elijo. You, informal. You choose:
Student: Eliges.
Teacher: Eliges. Good. So how would you say I don’t want you to choose for me? Now when for means on
   my behalf, I don’t want you to choose for me, I don’t want you to choose on my behalf, the for that
   we use is por. But, maybe we don’t mean on my behalf. Maybe we mean I don’t want you to
   choose something for me. Literally something that is for me. So, in that case we would use para.
   But, let’s make the sentence like on my behalf. I don’t want you to choose for me. I don’t want you
   to choose on my behalf, speaking informally:
Student: No quiero que elijas por mí.
Teacher: Very good. No quiero que elijas por mí. Good. So por mí is like on my behalf. I don’t want you
  to take my decisions. No quiero que elijas por mí. To break was romper, or romperse if we say
  something breaks without saying who breaks it. We said that romper was related to rapture in
  English, which also means it’s related to corrupt. The -rupt of corrupt is rupture, disrupt, erupt.
  So romper is to break. How would you say I don’t want it to break? I don’t want it to break:
Student: No quiero que rompa.
Teacher: If you say no quiero que rompa I’m waiting to hear what you don’t want it to break.
Student: Lo rompa, ah, not lo rompa-
Teacher: That would be a different sentence-
Student: Se rompa.
Teacher: Good. If you were to say no quiero que lo rompa, it would mean I don’t want him or her to break
  it, or you (formal) to break it. If you say no quiero que se rompa, we are not saying who. We are
  just saying I don’t want it to break. I don’t want it to break itself, even though we don’t literally
  mean itself. We said that we can use para, for, para. We can use para like to, when it’s in order
  to. So when we have a to in English which implies in order to, we should put para in Spanish.
  What was to find?
Student: Encontrar.
Teacher: Encontrar. Encontrarse, encontrarse, to find oneself, is to meet up. To meet up. So how would
  you say we have met up or we have found ourselves or each other, which is the same word in
  Spanish?
Student: Hemos. Nos hemos encontrado.
Teacher: Good. Nos hemos encontrado. We have met up. So we have met up in order to speak. We have
  met up to speak. We have met up in order to speak:
Student: So, nos hemos encontrado para hablar.
Teacher: Good. Nos hemos encontrado para hablar. Good. So we have met up to speak. And, although
  we wouldn’t say in order to speak usually in English, if that to speak implies in order to speak
  then we will put para in Spanish. Nos hemos encontrado para hablar. But after para que, so
  that, para que, you must use the mood tense. We have cooked in order that they eat. We have
  cooked so they eat:
Student: Hemos cocinado para que coman.
Teacher: Good. Hemos cocinado para que coman. Good. We have cooked so that they eat. And you can’t
  make the shortcut there, of para comer, hemos cocinado para comer, because of course it would
  just sound like we have cooked in order to eat, in order for us to eat. Good. To go back or to return
  is volver. Volver.
Student: Volver.
Teacher: Volver, like in revolve. The -volve of revolve is volver and exists in Spanish, revolver. But in
  Spanish, revolver means to stir. Revolver. So volver is to return or to go back or to come back.
  How do you think you would say I return? I come back or go back:
Student: Volvo. Vuelvo.
Teacher: Vuelvo. Good. The o splits. Vuelvo. How would you say you come back or you go back, speaking
  informally?
Student: Vuevles.
Teacher: Volver. Take it slowly.
Student: Vuelves.
Teacher: Good. Vuelves. Now if you say so that you come back, in order for you to come back, so that you
  come back:
Student: Para que vuelvas.
Teacher: Good. Para que vuelvas. So you could say something like I’ve done it so that you come back. I’ve
  done it so that you come back. So I have done: the version of hacer after haber, after any version
  of haber is hecho. It’s very irregular. And we said that hecho, the version of hacer after haber,
  also means fact. So I have done, how is it? I have done:
Student: He hecho.
Teacher: Good. I have done it so that you come back, informally:
Student: Lo he hecho para que vuelvas.
Teacher: Good. Lo he hecho para que vuelvas. How would you say I have done it so that they come back?
Student: Lo he hecho para que vuelvan.
Teacher: Good. Le he hecho para que vuelvan. Good. How would you say they have done it so that we
   come back? They have done it so that we come back:
Student: Lo han hecho para que volvamos.
Teacher: Good. Lo han hecho para que volvamos. They have done it so that we come back. And I should
   mention that you might hear para shortened down in Spanish to pa. So para que would sound
   like pa que, pa que volvamos. How much this happens or if it happens at all depends on dialect.
   So you will notice it if you hear pa, it’s just para. What was the word for so, like in so tired?
Student: Tan.
Teacher: Tan. And también, t-a-m-b-i-e-n is as well, also. And it actually has tan inside there. The n turned
   to an m because of that b, it softened it. So we have tan and then bien. También. Just like in
   English as well. Tan, other than so, can also be translated as as in certain circumstances and then
   well, from as well, bien. So interestingly they are like direct translations of each other. Even though
   if you think about it the direct translation doesn’t make any sense: as well. But it’s the same in
   English and Spanish. As well, también. So how would you say so that you too, so that you as well
   come back, and let’s speak informally?
Student: Para que tú también vuelvas.
Teacher: Good. Para que tú también vuelvas or para que vuelvas tú también. So how would you say we
   have done everything, we have done everything, so that you also come back? We have done
   everything so that you also come back:
Student: Hemos hecho todo para que tú también vuelvas.
Teacher: Good. Very good. Hemos hecho todo para que tú también vuelvas. Very good.
 Spanish Track 75
Teacher: What was to do or to make?
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Hacer. We said that for the informal positive command, we have a shortcut. We find the you
   version of the verb, haces, and we take away the s. “Hace”. But with hacer we have an irregularity.
   The informal command for hacer is haz. H-a-z. So in most of Spain, you will hear /hath/. Haz.
Student: Haz.
Teacher: So if you want to say do it:
Student: Hazlo.
Teacher: Hazlo. Good. Another use of the mood tense is to turn words like where into wherever. What was
   where?
Student: Donde.
Teacher: Donde. So of course we can’t use the mood tense with donde because it’s not a verb. How do you
   say where you want, where you want, speaking informally?
Student: Donde quieres.
Teacher: Donde quieres. Good. Now if we want to say wherever you want, then to get wherever actually
   we can change the verb to the mood tense and that changes the feeling of where. And then where
   turns into wherever. So if you want to say wherever you want, still informally:
Student: Donde queras.
Teacher: I want to hear well though the i and the e in quieras.
Student: Donde quieras.
Teacher: Good. Donde quieras. So do it wherever you want:
Student: Hazlo donde quieras.
Teacher: Good. Hazlo donde quieras. What was you like it, still informally? You like it:
Student: Te gusta.
Teacher: Te gusta. How would you say do it how you like to do it - so do it how you like. What was the
   word for how? How are you called? What’s your name?:
Student: Cómo.
Teacher: Cómo. Good. So do it how it pleases you. Do it how you like:
Student: Hazlo como te gusta.
Teacher: Good. Hazlo como te gusta. Do it how you like to. Do it how you like to do it. Now, what if you
   wanted to give the meaning do it however you like?
Student: Hazlo como te guste.
Teacher: Hazlo como te guste. In English we are changing how to however and in Spanish we are changing
   te gusta to te guste. Hazlo como te guste. How would you say do what you prefer? Do what you
   prefer. Still informal:
Student: Haz lo que preferes.
Teacher: And:
Student: Prefieres.
Teacher: Very good. Haz lo que prefieres. So what we are investigating here is an optional use of the mood
   tense, no? Because haz lo que prefieres is perfect Spanish. It just means do what you prefer. But
   if you want to give the meaning do whatever you prefer how will you change that?
Student: Haz lo que prefieras.
Teacher: Good. Haz lo que prefieras. Do whatever you prefer. Eat whatever you prefer. Eat whatever you
   prefer, speaking informally:
Student: Comes lo que prefieras.
Teacher: Comes lo que prefieras would be you eat whatever you prefer. Comes lo que prefieras, which is
   a way of saying it. You could say it like this. Comes lo que prefieras. It just sounds actually a
  little sweeter. You eat whatever you prefer, rather than eat whatever you prefer. But, here we are
  working with the order. We have a shortcut where we are not using the mood tense, what is it?
  We have comes, you eat. And what do we do to get the order?
Student: Come.
Teacher: Come. Good. So making the order, even though your sentence was very nice and very sweet,
  comes lo que prefieras. Let’s make it an order. Eat whatever you prefer:
Student: Come lo que prefieras.
Teacher: Very good. Come lo que prefieras. Now make this formal. Eat whatever you prefer, but speaking
  formally:
Student: Coma lo que prefiera.
Teacher: Very good. So here we have two mood tenses. We have coma which is the order and then prefiera,
  giving us whatever from what. Coma lo que prefiera. What if you were speaking to more than
  one person? Eat whatever you prefer:
Student: Coman lo que prefieran.
Teacher: Good. Coman lo que prefieran. Good. What was to need in Spanish? Sounding more like to
  necessitate.
Student: Necesitar.
Teacher: Necesitar. Good. Whenever you need. Whenever you need. How do you say that? Speaking
  informally:
Student: Cuando necesites?
Teacher: Very good. Cuando necesites. Whenever you need. Good. We said that to choose was like elect.
  Elegir. Elegir. How would you say I choose?
Student: “Elejo.”
Teacher: And we had some change happening with that e.
Student: Ahh, yes. Elijo.
Teacher: Elijo. Good. Elijo. You choose, speaking informally:
Student: Eliges.
Teacher: Eliges. To follow and also to continue or to carry on, we can use this verb like that, is seguir.
   Seguir. So it’s to follow or to continue, to carry on. Seguir.
Student: Seguir.
Teacher: And this behaves like elegir in that the e will not split, it will just turn into an i when we stress it.
   So how do you say I continue or I follow?
Student: Sigo.
Teacher: Sigo. And there are some other verbs that come from seguir. We have conseguir, to get or to
   manage to. We have perseguir which means to chase. And we will see the same irregularity in
   them. The I version of conseguir, consigo. Perseguir, persigo. So like we said before, we can
   generalize the irregularities in Spanish. So sigo, I follow, and how about he, she, it follows, or you
   (formal) follow:
Student: Sigue.
Teacher: Sigue. You (informal):
Student: Sigues.
Teacher: They or you guys:
Student: Siguen.
Teacher: But we:
Student: Seguimos.
Teacher: Seguimos. Good. We are not stressing the e so it escapes from the irregularity. Seguimos. Good.
   So we could say something like I’ll follow you wherever you go. So, we can say I will follow you
   or we can just use the present I follow you. Because, the wherever you go is a future context
   informally.
Student: Te sigo.
Teacher: Te sigo. Good. Wherever you go. So this is actually to wherever you go. Wherever you go to, to
   wherever you go. So how would you say to where?
Student: Adonde
Teacher: Adonde. Good. And you go (informally) and we want the mood tense which is irregular.
Student: Is it vaya?
Teacher: Yes. Very good. So now we can say the whole sentence. I’ll follow you wherever you go. To
   wherever you go, informally:
Student: Te sigo adonde vaya- vayas.
Teacher: Good. Very good. Another irregular verb in the mood tense is ser. The base for the mood tense of
   ser is sea. Sea. S-e-a.
Student: Sea.
Teacher: And you’ll hear the very common expression o sea, o sea. Literally meaning something like “or it
   might be”. O sea, o sea is just like this kind of way to break up speech whilst you’re thinking what
   to say like an uhhh. So sea is the base for the mood tense. So if you want to say something like I
   prefer that it be like this. I prefer that it’s like this. I prefer for it to be like this. Of course we say
   I prefer that it be like this. What was the word for like this or like that?
Student: Así.
Teacher: Good. So I prefer that it be like this, I prefer it to be like this:
Student: Prefiero que lo- do we, no we don’t use lo here.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Prefiero que sea así.
Teacher: Very good. Prefiero que sea así. What does sea lo que sea mean?
Student: Whatever will be will be.
Teacher: Whatever it is, whatever will be, will be. Sea lo que sea. Whatever will come. Good.
 Spanish Track 76
Teacher: The word for there is or there are, there is or there are, in most languages this is a separate verb,
   but in English we are expressing it with a combination of there and is or are. In Spanish, to say
   there is or there are we have hay, hay, h-a-y, and hay is actually from haber.
Student: Hay.
Teacher: Hay. And for once we have a situation where it’s changing in English and it’s not changing in
   Spanish: hay means there is or there are, it’s not changing. The word for somebody is alguien,
   alguien.
Student: Alguien.
Teacher: Good. How would you say there is somebody here that wants to speak with you? And let’s speak
   formally, there is somebody here that wants to speak with you. So the first bit is there is somebody
   here:
Student: Hay alguien aquí.
Teacher: Good. That wants to speak with you, speaking formally:
Student: Que quiere hablar con usted.
Teacher: Good. Hay alguien aquí que quiere hablar con usted. There is somebody here that wants to
   speak with you. Now, if you say Is there somebody here that speaks Spanish? And you specify
   with your subjectivity this thing that we don’t know if it exists or not, this somebody that speaks
   Spanish, and you do that with this que structure: Is there somebody here that speaks Spanish, then
   here you will use the mood tense, this subjective tense. So, how would you say that? Is there
   somebody here that speaks Spanish?:
Student: ¿Hay alguien aquí que hable español?
Teacher: Very good. ¿Hay alguien aquí que hable español? But if somebody replies to you there are two
   people that speak Spanish here, there are two people here that speak Spanish, you think you will
   use the mood tense?
Student: No.
Teacher: No, they are just saying what there is! So, there are two people, which in Spanish is there are two
   persons, so, there are two people here:
Student: Hay dos personas aquí.
Teacher: That speak Spanish:
Student: Que hablan español.
Teacher: Very good. Hay dos personas aquí que hablan español. Very good. The past of hay is había,
   which shows us, actually, that hay comes from haber. It’s a very weird historic version of haber.
   But había, we see more clearly, that it comes from haber. Now, había doesn’t change either, so
   you will have to resist the temptation to say habían when you want to say there were instead of
   there was, no? It’s always había, doesn’t change. Hay doesn’t change for there is or there are,
   and había doesn’t change for there was or there were. So, how would you say There were two
   people that spoke Spanish? Now, this is an interesting sentence, because in English we will use
   the point in the past, there were two people that spoke Spanish, but what do you think we will use
   in Spanish, the point or the line?
Student: The line.
Teacher: Why?
Student: Because I’ve heard Spaniards speaking in English, saying it that way.
Teacher: So, you believe that’s the negative language transfer, that’s great! So, it makes sense for it to be
   the line in the past, because what we are referring to here is the fact they were Spanish-speakers,
   and they weren’t Spanish-speakers just for that moment, were they? So if we look at it and we
   think about which one fits better, we will choose the line, so again, it’s a great example that we
   don’t want to take a direct translation from English, from spoke, we want to just look at the context
   and decide if it makes sense to use the line or the point. So, give me this sentence - there were two
   people here that spoke Spanish:
Student: Había dos personas aquí que hablaban español.
Teacher: Good. Había dos personas aquí que hablaban español. If we were to use the point here – que
   hablaron español – we wouldn’t be talking about the fact that they are Spanish-speakers, but
  rather that they spoke Spanish at that time, whatever time we are referring to. We said that hay,
  there is or there are; or había, there was or there were; comes from haber in fact. So, when we
  say something like there has to be something, and with this be we mean exist, there has to exist
  something, this be is actually coming from there is/there are, not from to be. It’s coming from this
  invisible verb that we do not have in English, which we make up for by using there is/there are.
  So, when we say something like there has to be something that you can eat, there must be
  something that you can do, this be is exist, there must exist something, in which case it’s haber.
  It’s not ser and it’s not estar, and if you try to think which one it is, ser or estar, you will be a
  long time trying to work out which one it is. So, how would you say this sentence? There has to
  be something that you can do (let’s speak informally). There has to be something that you can do.
  You can use has to or must, doesn’t make a lot of difference here.
Student: Tiene que hay-
Teacher: But it’s to form, so hay and había come from?
Student: Haber. Tiene que haber.
Teacher: Something that you can do:
Student: Algo que puedas hacer.
Teacher: Yes, puedas, very good. Tiene que haber algo que puedas hacer. Because here, like before with
  the example of is there somebody that speaks Spanish, we are speaking about the existence of
  something when we don’t know whether it exists or not, with this structure of hay and que. So,
  we are seeing that the mood tense has structural limitations, it can occur only in certain places
  structurally, and at the same time only to give certain meanings or feelings. Now, these meanings
  or feelings and the fact that Spanish is concerned with us expressing them and perceiving them
  through the language shows the value system of Spanish, or part of the value system of Spanish.
  Now different languages have different value systems, what a language requires you to express
  through it, and then the other things that the language might ignore might be considered its value
  system. And languages, like cultures and individuals, have things they value, things they pay
  attention to and things they don’t, which is what makes something like the mood tense so
  incredibly interesting to analyze and observe and use. So again, not something we want to be
obsessed about getting correct, it really is something that we want to feel and also understand
logically through our exposure and use of Spanish. We should also bear in mind that the use of the
subjunctive or the mood tense can change slightly depending on dialect and also idiolect, which is
the individual dialect of each person. So, we want to look out for it, listen actively, analyze and
enjoy the journey of understanding it and also using it and the different possibilities of expression
that that gives us. It will be a very fascinating insight into the value system of this particular
language.
 Spanish Track 77
Teacher: How would you say there should be something to eat? There should be something to eat - so, we
   said that should was would owe or would must, so what is to owe, which we can use like must and
   it’s related to debt?
Student: Deber.
Teacher: Deber. And would must or would owe gives us the meaning should.
Student: Debería.
Teacher: Good. There should be something to eat:
Student: Debería haber.
Teacher: Good. Your first place your mind is going to go is to choose between ser and estar. If neither fit,
   make that little check, “oh, is this exist? Is this the be that means exist?” And then you know it’s
   haber. So, there should be, there should exist something to eat:
Student: Debería haber algo comer- para comer.
Teacher: Good, in order to eat, there should be something in order to eat, good. Debería haber algo para
   comer, there should be something to eat. Very good. Another common place that we use the mood
   tense in Spanish, is when we say it is, an adjective, que, and then a verb. This verb is going to go
   into the mood tense, you are noticing that que has a lot to do with the subjunctive, that this que
   introduces the mood tense in many cases. So, for example, if I want to give you some advice and
   tell you it’s terrible that you eat this, it is terrible that you eat this. So, let’s speak informally:
Student: Es terrible que comas esto.
Teacher: Good. Es terrible que comas esto. Good. So, it’s the que, the combination of es terrible and que,
   which introduces this mood tense. If you say it is terrible if you eat this, then you don’t use the
   mood tense. So, how would you say that? It is terrible if you eat this, still speaking informally:
Student: Es terrible si comes esto.
Teacher: Good. Es terrible si comes esto. How would you say it is possible?
Student: Es posible.
Teacher: Good. How would you say It’s possible that we go later? What is later, or more late?
Student: Más tarde.
Teacher: Good. And what is the root for the mood tense of go? Voy, va becomes:
Student: Vaya.
Teacher: Good. So, it is possible that we go later:
Student: Es posible que vayamos más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Es posible que vayamos más tarde. Fuerte in Spanish means strong, but it’s also used
   colloquially and maybe the closest translation that I can think of would be something like, I mean,
   again it’s very colloquial, but you can say oh, that’s hardcore, that’s full-on, in Spanish you say a
   lot qué fuerte, qué fuerte, how heavy, how hardcore, how full-on, qué fuerte. And we see that
   we can use qué like how – qué fuerte; qué lindo, how nice, how beautiful; qué bueno, how good.
   You can say qué increíble que or qué fuerte que, so, whilst we have two que’s there in Spanish,
   this is just how incredible that, how hardcore that, and, of course, we will carry on into the mood
   tense. So, how strong, how heavy, that he is here, how would you say that?
Student: Qué fuerte que esté aquí.
Teacher: Good. Qué fuerte que esté aquí. In English we achieve a similar feeling to what we get with the
   Spanish subjunctive sometimes with words like should or might. Here for example, in English we
   could say how incredible that he should come, here we don’t mean should, like in its literal
   meaning like debería, no, here in English we are using should to give this kind of mood tense
   feeling: how incredible that he should come. Está bien, está bien, means it’s okay. The literal
   translation of bien is well, and to be well is a state, so it goes with estar: está bien, but it can also
   be used like it’s okay. So for example, you could say, you know, it’s okay that you ask but I don’t
   have to reply. So, to ask is preguntar, and to reply or to respond is responder. So, we will say
   it’s okay that you ask, but it’s not necessary that I respond, I don’t need to respond, it’s not
   necessary that I respond. So, the first bit – it’s okay that you ask, and we are speaking informally,
   and to ask was preguntar:
Student: Está bien que preguntes.
Teacher: Good. Está bien que preguntes. So, it’s like okay, you can ask as much as you like, so this is the
   feeling we get here with the mood tense, or in English we might use might here to get this kind of
   mood tense feeling: it’s okay that you might ask. But:
Student: Pero.
Teacher: It’s not necessary that I respond, I don’t need to respond, it’s not necessary that I respond, there's
   a few ways we can say this:
Student: No es necesito.
Teacher: Necesito is the verb.
Student: Necesidad?
Teacher: Is necessity. So, necessary. How is vocabulary in Spanish?
Student: Ah, wait, necesario.
Teacher: Good. So, it’s not necessary that I respond:
Student: No es necesario que responda.
Teacher: Very good. Está bien que preguntes, pero no es necesario que responda. And there we have
   the mood tense after es necesario, or no es necesario que, so we have it is, adjective, que, and
   then the verb, and that verb with the mood tense. We also could have said no hace falta que
   responda, it doesn’t make lack, this common expression we said that we will hear around, hacer
   falta, no hace falta que responda. How would you say it is important that we find it soon? It’s
   important that we find it soon:
Student: Es importante que lo encontremos pronto.
Teacher: Good. Es importante que lo encontremos pronto. Good.
Spanish Track 78
Teacher: What was to follow or to continue, to carry on?
Student: Seguir.
Teacher: Seguir. And how was I continue or I carry on or I follow?
Student: Sigo.
Teacher: Sigo. Good. If you want to say I continue speaking, here we use the -ing, I continue speaking, so
   how would that be?
Student: Sigo hablando.
Teacher: Sigo hablando. He continues speaking:
Student: Sigue hablando.
Teacher: Sigue hablando. He continues speaking, she continues speaking, you (formal) continue speaking.
   It’s probable that he continues speaking. So, in English we will probably say he’ll probably
   continue speaking, but in Spanish it is probable that he continues speaking. So, how would that
   be?
Student: Es probable que siga hablando.
Teacher: Very good. Es probable que siga hablando. Good. It is probable that he continues speaking. So,
   after seguir to get the meaning of continue we can use the -ing. What was to be for characteristics?
Student: Ser.
Teacher: Ser. Good. How would you make the -ing form of ser?
Student: Siendo.
Teacher: Siendo. Free, in the sense of not requiring any money, is gratis in Spanish.
Student: Gratis.
Teacher: This is where we get gratuitous from in English. It’s a bit gratuitous, it’s unnecessary, it’s free, it’s
   extra. Gratis. So, you can say it’s imperative that it continues to be free. So, it’s imperative that it
   continues being free, how would you say that?
Student: Es imperativo que siga siendo gratis.
Teacher: Good. Es imperativo que siga siendo gratis. To start, we said that we had comenzar and
   empezar. Comenzar is, of course, easier to remember and use, because it sounds like commence,
   but empezar is probably more common. So, you can use whichever you like now. How would you
   say it’s spectacular that they start to speak Spanish? Now, after start, to connect to the next to
   form you need a. There are just a handful of verbs that are not verbs of movement, for example,
   like ir, volver, salir, that need a to connect, apart from these there are just a handful of verbs that
   use some preposition to connect, and empezar and comenzar are two of them. So, how would
   you say it’s spectacular that they begin to speak Spanish (spectacular is the same word in
   Spanish)?
Student: Es “spectacular”,
Teacher: Almost the same word.
Student: Oh, right, espectacular.
Teacher: Good, es espectacular, that they begin:
Student: Que comienzen a hablar español.
Teacher: Good. Es espectacular que comienzen a hablar español. It's spectacular that they start to speak
   Spanish. Now, after comenzar and empezar you could also put the -ing form, and the meaning
   would change a little, it would mean it’s spectacular that they start out speaking Spanish. Now, in
   English there is not a lot of difference, that they begin to speak Spanish, that they begin speaking
   Spanish, both in English mean to start speaking Spanish. But in Spanish, if you use the -ing here
   it would mean that they start out speaking Spanish, like right from the beginning. So, when I’m
   speaking about these courses for example, I say that we start out speaking Spanish, right from the
   beginning. Now, speaking about that in Spanish I would use the -ing here. So, it’s spectacular that
   they start out speaking Spanish:
Student: Es espectacular que comienzen hablando español.
Teacher: Good. And here we don’t need the a, because we are not connecting to a to form. What was the
   verb to finish or to terminate?
Student: Terminar.
Teacher: Terminar. Now, if you want to say a sentence like I want you guys to speak with me when you
   finish selling them, we will say when you finish to sell them. Here you won’t use the -ing, but to
   finish, terminar, is also one of those verbs that needs a preposition to connect to the next to form.
   In this case the preposition is de. So, to finish selling them is terminar de vender. So, I want you
   guys to speak with me when you finish selling them, so the first bit is I want you guys to speak with
   me, how is that bit?
Student: Quiero que hablen conmigo.
Teacher: Good, mood tense, quiero que hablen conmigo. Good. I want that you talk with me, quiero que
   hablen conmigo, when you finish selling them. So, when you finish, and we are still speaking to
   you guys:
Student: Cuando terminen,
Teacher: Good, why did you use the mood tense there – cuando terminen?
Student: Because it’s the future when.
Teacher: Good. When cuando refers to generally, we won’t use the mood tense, we just use the present,
   and here, referring to a future event that hasn’t happened, after cuando, we use the mood tense,
   well remembered. Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen, when you finish selling them,
   and we are not going to use selling, we are going to use to sell, and we connect that with de:
Student: Cuando terminen de venderlos.
Teacher: Good, so altogether – I want you guys to speak with me when you finish selling them:
Student: Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen de venderlos.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen de venderlos. So this means I want you
   guys to speak with me when you finish selling them, but terminar we can also use like end up: I
   want you guys to speak with me when you end up selling them. So, using the -ing form after
   terminar, instead of de and the to form, gives us this meaning of “end up”. So, if you wanted to
   say, I want you guys to speak with me when you end up selling them, so I want you guys to speak
   with me:
Student: Quiero que hablen conmigo.
Teacher: When you end up selling them, so we will say when you finish and then we will actually use the -ing:
Student: Cuando terminen vendiéndolos.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen vendiéndolos. I want you guys to speak
   with me when you end up selling them. So, there is a difference here, depending on whether we
   use the to form or the -ing form, just as we saw with empezar or comenzar, there can be a
   difference between using the to form afterwards or the -ing form afterwards, and both of them need
   a preposition to join the to form, which might be a clue to you that there is a difference between
   using the to form and then the -ing form. If the to form is joining with a preposition, then maybe
   this particular verb takes the -ing form afterwards as well with a slightly different meaning.
   Empezar a hablar, to start to speak, to start speaking; empezar hablando, to actually begin
   something speaking, or, as we would probably say, to start out speaking; terminar de vender, to
   finish selling; terminar vendiendo, to end up selling. So, what we have aimed to teach here is the
   idea of the mood tense, the general feeling of the mood tense, and the kind of constructions in
   which it occurs, and, like I said, understanding the mood tense is about listening out for it, and
   listening out for how people around you use it. A great way to learn it is to chat online, for example,
   because maybe in real life, and almost certainly at the beginning, you won’t pick up those subtle
   changes in vowels that you get with the mood tense. But if you are chatting online you will notice
   quite clearly, “ah, there they used an a and not an e, or there they used an e and not an a, oh why?”
   And then you will look at the context of the sentence and work out why the mood tense was used
   and that really is the best way to internalize it.
 Spanish Track 79
Teacher: So let’s make a little recap of some of the situations in which we are using the mood tense with a
   new verb, dejar. Dejar. Dejar means to leave, but in the sense of to leave a message, rather than
   leave, to go out like salir. Dejar.
Student: Dejar.
Teacher: Dejar. Good. How would you say leave me a message, speaking formally? A message is un
   mensaje. Un mensaje.
Student: Déjeme un mensaje.
Teacher: Good. Déjeme un mensaje. And, of course, positive command, we have the me, me, after the
   verb, déjeme un mensaje. How would you say I want you to leave me a message, speaking
   informally? I want you to leave me a message:
Student: Quiero que me dejes un mensaje.
Teacher: Good. Quiero que me dejes un mensaje. In the same way, if you were to say I want to tell him to
   leave me a message, you won’t say I want to tell him to leave me a message literally, you will say
   I want to tell him that he leaves me a message. What is to say or to tell?
Student: Decir.
Teacher: Decir. Good, so, I want to tell him is the first bit.
Student: Quiero decirle.
Teacher: That he leaves me a message:
Student: Que deje- me deje un mensaje.
Teacher: Good. Quiero decirle que me deje un mensaje. So, you don’t want to tell him that he is leaving
   you a message, you want to tell him to leave you a message, so here we use the mood tense. If you
   were to say quiero decirle que me deja un mensaje what would be understood there without the
   mood tense is I want to tell him that he, she, or you (formal) is leaving me a message, but if you
   use here your mood tense, then it’s understood there that sense of order, and you will understand
   I want to tell him to leave me a message, quiero decirle que me deje un mensaje. Good.
   When he leaves you the message, call me (let’s speak informally); when he leaves you the message,
   call me:
Student: Cuando te deje el mensaje.
Teacher: Good. Cuando te deje el mensaje, call me, informally, so, it’s our shortcut.
Student: Llámame.
Teacher: Good. Cuando te deje el mensaje, or cuando él te deje el mensaje, if you wanted to clarify,
   llámame. Good. So, after cuando, when we are referring to the future, when we are referring to
   something that hasn’t happened yet, we feel a bit superstitious about it and we want to use our
   mood tense. Cuando te deje el mensaje, llámame. It’s essential that he sees my message. It is
   essential - the -tial here, what do you think might happen to it in Spanish? Like the -tion, like in
   tradition, becomes:
Student: Tradición.
Teacher: So, something similar might happen here.
Student: Esencial.
Teacher: Well done, esencial. Spacial - espacial, good. So, it’s essential that he sees my message:
Student: Es esencial que.
Teacher: He sees my message, it’s based on the irregularity of veo, the I version:
Student: Vea.
Teacher: Good. So, it’s essential that he, or she, or you (formal) see my message:
Student: Es esencial que vea mi mensaje.
Teacher: Good. Es esencial que vea mi mensaje. Good. Ojalá in Spanish means something like hopefully.
   Ojalá.
Student: Ojalá.
Teacher: You will hear it a lot, ojalá, and there are a lot of versions of the history of where it came from.
   What it’s definitely got something to do with is “Allah”, the Arabic word for God, or the god,
   Allah, and the south of Spain was part of the Muslim world for around eight centuries, so we have
   a lot of Arabic words and structures and habits in Spanish, and one of them is this popular
   expression ojalá. And there are a lot of versions of where it came from exactly, although my
   favorite is that it’s a contraction of “ojo-Allah”, ojo means eye, and it’s still used in some places,
   like watch out! Ojo! Careful, watch it, beware, so it’s like “ojo-Allah”, so you say it when you
   want something, “ojo-Allah”, I want this, ojalá, hopefully. Although that’s just one version of
   where ojalá came from. So, after ojalá you can use the mood tense to say what you want to happen,
   so, you can say for example, hopefully she will leave a message, or she leaves a message, using
   your mood tense. Hopefully she leaves a message:
Student: Ojalá deje un mensaje.
Teacher: Good, ojalá deje un mensaje. How would you say hopefully it will be soon? When something
   happens is a characteristic of it, so if you want to say hopefully it’s soon, we need to use that
   irregular root of ser that we have in the mood tense, do you remember how that is, and it’s like the
   popular expression that we have in Spanish, that you might hear a lot, which begins o.
Student: O sea.
Teacher: Good. Hopefully it is soon, hopefully it will be soon:
Student: Ojalá sea pronto.
Teacher: Good. Ojalá sea pronto. Good. So, ojalá you will hear and want to use very often, and also you
   use with this subjective tense. So, like we said, you just want to listen out for when the mood tense
   is used, get interested in it, analyze why it’s been used, think about why it’s been used, think about
   how that fits in to the image and the vision that you are getting of the mood tense and how and
   why it’s used. It’s something that you should enjoy and analyze and the most interesting areas
   might be the optional uses, because with the optional uses of the mood tense you can really give
   many different tones to what you are saying, whether it’s humor, or sarcasm, or sincerity, irritation
   – there is a whole spectrum of feelings you can express with it. And these are best understood
   explored in a live environment – practicing, listening to and analyzing Spanish.
Spanish Track 80
Teacher: We saw many uses for se, the sound /se/. We have sé as a verb, yo sé, from saber, I know, and this
   sé is written with a written accent sé or yo sé, or we said lo sé is very common, I know it, just
   because sé, sé, sé is a little short, so you might hear lo sé, lo sé, lo sé, I know it. And then we have
   the grammatical se which we’ve seen as self – himself, herself, themselves, yourself speaking
   formally, itself, oneself. So, for example, you can say he stays, or he remains himself:
Student: Se queda.
Teacher: Se queda. Good. So, this is the se that we have for him/her/you (formal)/it/themselves. And then
   we also had a se which was when we have two /l/’s together – the first one, the personal one will
   turn into se only because Spanish doesn’t like phonetically the sound of having these two /l/’s
   together. So, for example, if you had a verb like to prepare, what is to prepare?
Student: Preparar.
Teacher: Preparar. And I prepare:
Student: Preparo.
Teacher: Preparo. I prepare it:
Student: Lo preparo.
Teacher: And I prepare them it, I prepare it for them or I prepare them it:
Student: Se lo preparo.
Teacher: Se lo preparo. Good, this les turns into se, because we can’t have les lo. So, we’ve seen these uses
   of se so far – the grammatical se for self and then also this phonetic change. We have one more
   use for se to see, one more use for se. Now, when we combine se with me, te, le, les, nos, we get
   the meaning of on me in English, in the sense of it died on me, maybe the computer breaks down
   and you say it died on me. So you can say it died on me, it ran out on me, so you have this on me
   structure in English, which you can use with only some verbs. Now, in Spanish you can do this as
   well, only it’s much more common and it’s not restricted to just a few verbs. Adding se and then
   me/te/nos/le/les. So, for example, the door was la puerta, la puerta, and to close was cerrar,
   cerrar, so, if you want to say the door closes you will say the door closes itself, so let’s make that
   first, how would you say that? The door closes itself:
Student: La puerta se cierra.
Teacher: Good. La puerta se cierra or se cierra la puerta – it’s flexible. Now, if you want to say the door
   closes on me, se me cierra la puerta. So maybe the door keeps closing by itself and you want to
   give that on me feeling la puerta se me cierra, se me cierra la puerta, either are okay.
   To burn in Spanish is quemar, q-u-e-m-a-r. Quemar.
Student: Quemar.
Teacher: Quemar. So, if you want to say the dinner burns, the dinner gets burned, what was the dinner or
   to dine?
Student: Cenar.
Teacher: Cenar. So, cenar was to have dinner or to dine, and the dinner, the noun, how was it?
Student: Cena.
Teacher: La cena. Good. So, it burns itself the dinner, the dinner gets burned:
Student: La cena se quema.
Teacher: La cena se quema. Now, if you want to say the dinner burns on me, the dinner is burning on me,
   how would you make that meaning?
Student: La cena se me quema.
Teacher: La cena se me quema, se me quema la cena. So, you don’t have to worry about using this
   structure for now, until you are really comfortable with all of these little words like me, lo, le, las,
   and se, etc, all of these, but you will hear it, so we are looking at this just briefly now, so it doesn’t
   cause any confusion when you hear it. When you have this extra se, and you know it’s extra,
   because it’s coming with me/te/nos/le, it shouldn’t cause any confusion if you hear se me, se nos,
   se te, then you understand what is happening. Acabar, acabar, is to finish or to run out. Acabar.
Student: Acabar.
Teacher: Good. A-c-a-b-a-r.
Student: Acabar.
Teacher: How would you say the battery runs out, or the battery runs itself out? The battery is la batería,
   la batería:
Student: La batería se acaba.
Teacher: Good. La batería se acaba. If you want to say oh, my battery always runs out, you are talking
   about your phone and your battery is always running out, you can say my battery, the battery, like
   we said we don’t use my as much in Spanish as we do in English, the battery always runs out on
   me, the battery always runs out on me, what was the word for always?
Student: Siempre.
Teacher: Good, so let’s try this sentence. The battery always runs out on me:
Student: La batería siempre se me acaba.
Teacher: Very good. La batería siempre se me acaba. How would you ask Does the battery run out on
   you? Speaking informally, Does the battery run out on you?:
Student: ¿La batería se te acaba?
Teacher: Good. ¿La batería se te acaba? Good. And what if you were speaking formally?
Student: ¿La batería se le acaba?
Teacher: Good. ¿La batería se le acaba? We use le, because it’s on you, the battery runs out on you, so,
   not using lo, using le – to you, on you, from you, for you – all included there in le. And if you are
   speaking to more than one person:
Student: La batería se les acaban, no, se les acaba.
Teacher: Good, very good. La batería se les acaba. Good. So, if you hear this extra se around – you know
   what it’s doing. Quemar was to burn, how would you say it burned, it burned?
Student: Quemó.
Teacher: Quemó. Now, what if you wanted to say the dinner got burned?
Student: La cena se quemó.
Teacher: Good. La cena se quemó, se quemó la cena, the dinner got burned. Now, how would you say the
  dinner burned on me, the dinner got burned on me?
Student: La cena se me quemo- se me quemó.
Teacher: Good. La cena se me quemó, se me quemó la cena. The dinner burned on us:
Student: La cena se nos quemó.
Teacher: Good. La cena se nos quemó, very good.
Spanish Track 81
Teacher: How would you say I don't want the door to close on me? So what was to close?
Student: Cerrar.
Teacher: And the door:
Student: La puerta.
Teacher: La puerta. Which is related to port. Of course, you stress down on the o of port and you get
  puerto. Puerto is port. And you change the o to an a and you get puerta, door. So, I don't want
  the door to close on me:
Student: No quiero la puerta- Oh. I don't want that the door closes on me.
Teacher: Exactly.
Student: No quiero que la puerta se me cierre.
Teacher: Very good. After quiero que, no quiero que, we're using the mood tense. No quiero que la puerta
  se me cierre. Or no quiero que se me cierre la puerta. Good. How do you say again, or another
  time?
Student: Otra vez.
Teacher: Good. I don't want the door to close on me again:
Student: No quiero que la puerta se me cierre otra vez.
Teacher: Good. No quiero que la puerta se me cierre otra vez. What was the verb to return or to come
  back? And it's related to revolve.
Student: Volver.
Teacher: Volver. Good. Volver. Instead of saying otra vez, another way of saying again in Spanish is to
  use volver. So, for example, it closes again, we can say vuelve a cerrarse. It returns to close.
  Why do we have a here? Vuelve a cerrarse?
Student: Because it's a verb of movement.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say I don't want the door to close again, with volver, how would it be?
   So let's take it from the beginning. I don't want that:
Student: No quiero que.
Teacher: The door returns:
Student: La puerta vuelva.
Teacher: Very good. To close itself:
Student: A cerrarse.
Teacher: Good. No quiero que la puerta vuelva a cerrarse. Or no quiero que vuelva a cerrarse la puerta.
   So volver a can be used like again, and it's very common in Spanish. You might hear it around.
   So if you say I don't want it to happen again, for to happen you can use to pass. What was to pass?
   Or if you don't remember, you can make a guess here.
Student: Pasar.
Teacher: Pasar. Or occur, ocurrir. You can use that as well, for happen. Suceder, succession, suceder. All
   of these mean to happen. Pasar is probably easier, and easier to remember. So, I don't want it to
   happen again. I don't want it to return to happen:
Student: No quiero que vuelva a pasar.
Teacher: Good. No quiero que vuelva a pasar. Good. So we saw that we have the mood tense with which
   we are switching the vowel, so we go from vuelve to vuelva to get the mood tense. Or we have
   cerrar and we go from cierra to cierre to get the mood tense. We only have mood tense in the
   present and in the past. It doesn't exist in the futures. It used to, and there are a couple of words
   left behind in fixed expressions that still have this form. But for all intents and purposes, it doesn't
   exist any more in Spanish, the future mood tense. We have the present, which we've practiced and
   have a very good hold on, and the past mood tense. Now, the past mood tense is very easy to build.
   We will always build it going from the they form of the point in the past. And now that I've
   mentioned the point in the past, I should also mention that the mood tense for the past is the same
   for the line and the point. There are no two different ones. It counts for both. And we build it going
   from the point in the past for they. So for example, if we take a verb like to speak, hablar, and
   they spoke:
Student: Is it hablaron?
Teacher: Yes, hablaron. So that's the first step to find the mood tense for the past, is to go to the they form
   for the point in the past, hablaron. So you find hablaron and you change that last o to an a and
   what do you get?
Student: Hablaran.
Teacher: Hablaran. And that is your mood tense for they in the past. Now from that, we can work backwards
   to find the I, he, she, it, you (formal) version. If we work backwards from hablaran, what would
   we do to work backwards from hablaran, what would we get rid of?
Student: The n, hablara.
Teacher: Hablara. And then we can make the you (informal) version:
Student: Hablaras.
Teacher: Good. And we, and the accent won't move.
Student: Habláramos.
Teacher: Habláramos. Good. So that's your set. We can do the same now with comer. What was they ate,
   the point in the past?
Student: Comieron.
Teacher: Comieron, good. So now give me the mood tense version of they ate:
Student: Comieran.
Teacher: Comieran. Good. And I ate, he, she, it, you (formal) ate:
Student: Comiera.
Teacher: Good. We:
Student: Comiéramos.
Teacher: Comiéramos. And you (informal):
Student: Comieras.
Teacher: Comieras. So this is how we form our mood tense in the past. We want to go from the they form.
  So we use this pretty much in the same kind of situations that we use the present mood tense. Just
  in the past, with a couple of situations that are specifically for past. So for example, where quiero
  que necessitates the mood tense in the present, quería que, I wanted that, will necessitate the
  mood tense in the past. What is I wanted, using the line in the past?
Student: Quería.
Teacher: So now you could say something like I wanted them to eat with us. I wanted that they ate with us.
  And that they ate of course will be in the mood tense. I wanted that they ate with us:
Student: Quería que comieran con nosotros.
Teacher: Good. Quería que comieran con nosotros. And as we said, point in the past, line in the past,
  when it comes to the mood tense, it's the same. I was hoping that he would call me. I was hoping:
Student: Esperaba que.
Teacher: That he would call me. So, I was hoping that, we don't say would, we use the past mood tense
  again. I was hoping that he called me:
Student: Esperaba que me llamara.
Teacher: Good. Esperaba que me llamara. So whilst in English we would say I was hoping that he would
  call me, in Spanish I was hoping that he called me, and we use the past mood tense.
  Esperaba que me llamara. Good. What was to need or to necessitate?
Student: Necesitar.
Teacher: Good. Necesitar. How would you say we needed, using the line in the past? We needed, we were
  needing:
Student: Necesitábamos.
Teacher: Good. Necesitábamos. How would you say we needed to speak with him? We needed to speak
   with him:
Student: Necesitábamos que-
Teacher: Why que? We needed to speak:
Student: Necesitábamos hablar.
Teacher: With him:
Student: Con él.
Teacher: Good. So here we don't need the mood tense. Necesitábamos hablar con él. We needed to speak
   with him. But, if you were to say we needed that he speak with us, we needed that he spoke with
   us, then this that, this que is what most of the time in Spanish is alerting you that maybe you want
   to use the mood tense. So, we needed that he speak with us, how is that?
Student: Necesitábamos que hablara con nosotros.
Teacher: Very good. Necesitábamos que hablara con nosotros. Very good. What was to return, and we
   said that we can also use this verb like again?
Student: Volver.
Teacher: Volver. So if I wanted to say I called you again, I could just say I returned to call you. It's got
   nothing to do with actually returning, ah? It's just a way of saying again. So what is I returned,
   from to return, from volver:
Student: Volvá.
Teacher: Go back to comer:
Student: Volví.
Teacher: Good. So I called you again, speaking informally:
Student: Volví a llamarte.
Teacher: Good. Volví a llamarte. To organize. In order to organize:
Student: Para organizar.
Teacher: Good. So all together, I called you again in order to organize, speaking informally:
Student: Volví a llamarte para organizar.
Teacher: Good. Volví a llamarte para organizar. So, if we have para organizar, we don't need to worry
   about the mood tense. And we can sometimes adjust our sentence, putting to forms so that we can
   avoid finding the mood tense. So you could say something like volví a llamarte para organizar,
   volví a llamarte para organizar, I called you again in order to organize, and there you don't need
   the mood tense. But if you were to say I called you again so that, in order that, we organized, then
   there you would have to use the mood tense. So how would that be? I called you again, informally
   still:
Student: Volví a llamarte.
Teacher: So that:
Student: Para que.
Teacher: We organized. So it's the mood tense now, in the past:
Student: Organizaron. Organizaran. Organizáramos.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. So you have to take a trip through, ah, to find it. And it's quite time
   consuming at the beginning. But once you start practicing this past mood tense, of course it
   becomes much quicker to find these different forms. Volví a llamarte para que organizáramos.
   And like I said, you can even avoid the use of the mood tense just by saying volví a llamarte para
   organizar, in a structure like this one, for example. So we're seeing that there are similar structures
   to the structures we practiced the mood tense in the present with, just in the past.
 Spanish Track 82
Teacher: We also said that when we use ser or estar, with an adjective plus que - so for example, es
   relevante que, it's relevant that, está bien que, it's okay that - we will follow this up with the
   mood tense. So how would you say for example, it's not very relevant that they found it, it's not
   very relevant that they found it, for example? So how is it's not very relevant:
Student: No es muy relevante.
Teacher: Good. That they found it:
Student: Que encontraron, encontraran, lo encontraran.
Teacher: Good. No es muy relevante que lo encontraran. So here we're not starting with the past, are we?
   No es muy relevante. That's the present. But after que we refer back to the past, so we can use
   the past mood tense. In the same way, we could use the present mood tense. We could say it's not
   very relevant that they find it, that they might find it, using the present mood tense. So how would
   that sound?
Student: No es muy relevante que lo encuentren.
Teacher: Good. No es muy relevante que lo encuentren. Good. How would you say it wasn't very relevant?
   Now, the line (we can use the line in the past here) from ser is irregular. But, we can remember
   the word era in English, to remember this line in the past from ser. Because a line in the past is an
   era, and if we pronounce era as if it was Spanish, we get:
Student: Era.
Teacher: Era. And that's the line in the past from ser. So how would you say it was very relevant?
Student: Era muy relevante.
Teacher: Good. It was very relevant that they found it. It was very relevant that they found it:
Student: Era muy relevante que lo encontraran.
Teacher: Good. So, we want to identify the structures that allow us to use the mood tense, other than to use
   the mood tense correctly, to also avoid it sometimes. No? So imagine you're having a conversation
   and you just want to get the meaning across and the point across, and maybe you don't want to
   worry in that moment about finding the mood tense. You just have something you need to say, and
   you will worry about it later how it would be with the mood tense. So we can play around with the
   structure as we did, for example, with volví a llamarte para organizar. I called you again to
   organize, instead of volví a llamarte para que organizáramos. I called you again so that we
   organized. Like we did there, we can play around a little bit with the structure to avoid using the
   mood tense. So for example, instead of saying es importante que, we could also say the important
   thing is that. And when we say the important thing is that, what we end up with is es que. So, we
   said that we have a useful structure we can use to give this the important thing. So instead of saying
   la cosa importante, which would be a literal translation of the important thing, how could we
   make that structure using lo?
Student: Just say lo importante?
Teacher: Yes, lo importante. Good. So we said that instead of saying literally the important thing, you can
   just use lo. With any adjective, and you get this idea of the important thing. Lo importante, the
   important thing. Lo increíble, the incredible thing. Lo espectacular, the spectacular thing. Es
   que, and then after that es que, you don't need any mood tense. So, incredible is increíble, slightly
   different in Spanish than in English. We don't have the d, and we can actually see where incredible
   comes from. To believe in Spanish was creer. And creíble would be believable. And increíble is
   unbelievable. So incredible actually means unbelievable. Increíble.
Student: Increíble.
Teacher: So first, if we say it's incredible that, then we will want the mood tense. So, it's incredible that they
   come back, that they return. What was to return?
Student: Volver.
Teacher: Volver. Good. So, it's incredible that they return, that they come back:
Student: Es increíble que vuelvan.
Teacher: Good. Es increíble que vuelvan. But, if you wanted to avoid going through that, you could just
   say the incredible thing is that they come back. And there you don't need the mood tense. So, the
   incredible thing:
Student: Lo increíble.
Teacher: Is that they return:
Student: Es que vuelven.
Teacher: Good. Lo increíble es que vuelven. The incredible thing is that they come back. How would you
   say the incredible thing is that they do it again? And we will use the structure with volver to say
   again. So, the incredible thing is that they return to do it. What was to do or to make?
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: Good. The incredible thing is that they do it again. The incredible thing is that they return to do it:
Student: Lo increíble es que vuelven a hacerlo.
Teacher: Very good. Lo increíble es que vuelven a hacerlo. The incredible thing is that they do it again.
   But what if you were to say it is incredible that they do it again?
Student: Es increíble que vuelvan a hacerlo.
Teacher: Very good. Es increíble que vuelvan a hacerlo. And how would you say it's incredible that they
   did it again? It's incredible that they returned to do it:
Student: Es increíble que volvieron, volvieran, volvieran a hacerlo.
Teacher: Good. Es increíble que volvieran a hacerlo. Very good. Well done.
 Spanish Track 83
Teacher: What was the word for what or that?
Student: Que.
Teacher: Que. And what was the word for to buy?
Student: Comprar.
Teacher: Comprar. Good. So if we wanted to say something like that you bought it is not my problem, that
   you might have bought it is not my problem, the fact that you bought it is not my problem, we can
   just start with que and put the verb in the mood tense, and we get this feeling. The fact that you
   may have bought it. We're doing the same thing in English - may have - with this may we are
   getting some mood. So, let's start. Speaking informally, that you bought it, that you may have
   bought it:
Student: So comprar becomes compraron, comprara, compraras.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Que compraras.
Teacher: Don't forget your it just because you're concentrating so much on the verb.
Student: Que lo compraras.
Teacher: Is not my problem:
Student: No es mi problema.
Teacher: Good. Que lo compraras no es mi problema. Maybe you want to say something like, that you
   told him is not my problem. So, to tell we can use decir, to tell or to say, or contar we saw as well.
   Contar means to count or to recount. So let's use contar. That you told him, the fact that you told
   him, is not my problem. Speaking informally still:
Student: Que contaras. Que le contaras no es mi problema.
Teacher: Que le contaras no es mi problema. Good. In English I should say - although I have this London
   English so often I don't say - I should say if I were you. Now I was is the normal past tense, from
   to be. I was. So we change was to were to get the past mood tense in English. If I were you,
   hypothetical past. In Spanish whenever we speak about the past hypothetically, after si, after if, we
   will use the mood tense. So for example, what was the verb to be able to, can, related to power?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Poder. Now if you want to make the they form in the past, they could, they were able to, there's a
   slight change. The pod that you would be left with after taking -er away from poder, turns to pud.
   Pud. So how would you say they were able to, using the point in the past?
Student: Pudieron.
Teacher: Pudieron. Good. So from this base we can form the mood tense. So if you wanted to say something
   like if I could. If I could cook, I would cook. So, if I could:
Student: Si pudiera.
Teacher: To cook, or “to kitchen”:
Student: Cocinar.
Teacher: Good. Si pudiera cocinar, I would cook. So to find would, you must look back at I would like. It
   would please me:
Student: Me gustaría.
Teacher: Good. So, there you have your would. So I would cook:
Student: Cocinaría.
Teacher: Good. Si pudiera cocinar, cocinaría. How would you say if I could cancel it, I would? So, if I
   could cancel it, I would cancel it:
Student: Si pudiera cancelarlo.
Teacher: I would. So I would cancel it:
Student: Lo cancelaría.
Teacher: Good. Si pudiera cancelarlo, lo cancelaría. Good. What was to have? The to have that we use to
   go into the past?
Student: Haber.
Teacher: Haber. Now when haber goes into the point in the past, that first bit hab of haber, when you take
   off your -er, it changes for the point in the past. It becomes hub, h-u-b. So how would you say they
   had using the point in the past, going from haber and this hab of haber will become hub when
   we make the point in the past:
Student: Hubieron.
Teacher: Hubieron. Good. So we can say, if you had told me it. So speaking informally, if you had told me
   it, how would you say that? If you had told me it:
Student: Si me lo hubieras contado.
Teacher: Good. Si me lo hubieras contado, I would have gone. So if you had told me, if you had told me it,
   I would have gone. So now we need would have. We leave everything else at the door. So how do
   we get would have from haber?
Student: Habería.
Teacher: Habría.
Student: Habría.
Teacher: Good. The e falls away. Habría. So I would have gone:
Student: Habría ido.
Teacher: Good. So all together. If you had told me it, if you had told me it, I would have gone:
Student: Si me lo hubieras contado, habría ido.
Teacher: Good. Si me lo hubieras contado, habría ido. If we had known, we would have gone, if we had
   known, we would have gone:
Student: Si hubiéramos sabido,
Teacher: We would have gone:
Student: Habríamos ido.
Teacher: Good. What is to see?
Student: Ver.
Teacher: Ver. And what is they saw, point in the past?
Student: Vieron.
Teacher: Vieron. What was my house?
Student: Mi casa.
Teacher: Mi casa. Your house, informally:
Student: Tu casa.
Teacher: Tu casa. Do you remember how to say his house, her house, your house (formally), their house?
Student: Su casa.
Teacher: Su casa. Good. So how would you say if you saw their house? If you saw their house:
Student: Si vieras su casa.
Teacher: Good. Si vieras su casa. How would you say if you saw it, you would understand it? Let's speak
   formally. If you saw it, you would understand it, speaking formally:
Student: Si lo viera, comprendía- comprendería.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Comprendía's the past, is the tense, isn't it?
Teacher: The line in the past. Very good. Si lo viera, lo comprendería. Or we can use entender, which
   also means to understand. Si lo viera, lo entendería.
   I should mention that there also exists an alternative form for the past mood tense: the past
   subjunctive, with -ase or -iese. So you may hear hablase instead of hablara, or entendiese instead
   of entendiera, comiese instead of comiera, comiésemos instead of comiéramos. But how much
   that alternative form is used really depends on the dialect. The main way, the most common way
   of using the past subjunctive is the one that we've learned here. And there's no difference between
the two in meaning. They are just two versions of the same tense. So you don't need to worry about
using hablase instead of hablara for example, but you will need to recognize it if you hear it or
read it somewhere.
 Spanish Track 84
Teacher: So now we really do have the panorama of all times and moods in Spanish. So now that's
   everything. That's every tense including both the idea of time and the idea of mood. We've learned
   how to construct them all, and we should really listen actively to refresh any knowledge that we
   might need to refresh through our exposure to Spanish. Analyzing always what we hear, and if
   you're listening to a song or a movie maybe you just hear the endings of the verbs at the beginning.
   But if you can identify what that ending means, that's the important bit. In the same way this course
   has been focused equally on the process that we go through in building our structures in Spanish,
   as it has been focused on content. So half of the point of this course has been content, has been
   teaching you Spanish; and the other half has been how to manage Spanish, how to manage these
   elements that we've learned. How to think about this information and how to relate to information
   generally in a new way. How to find things that you think you might have forgotten. We've also
   looked now and then at some irregularities in Spanish. Verbs or other words that don't follow the
   rules that we learned. Now the older the language, the more irregularities it tends to have. Spanish,
   effectively being modern Latin, is quite prone to irregularities. But the irregularities can be made
   sense of within themselves. You can group together irregularities. So whilst throughout the course
   we were looking at the odd irregularity as it popped up, now at the end of the course we are going
   to tidy up the irregular verbs. So there are a group of verbs, which we can call the “go verbs".
   These are the verbs that use -go instead of -o for the I form. For example, how do you say to have,
   to have, for possession?
Student: Tener.
Teacher: Tener. And I have:
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. So this -go pops up for the I version, but only for the I version. How do you say he has, or
   she has, you (formal) have?
Student: Tiene.
Teacher: Tiene. And you (informal):
Student: Tienes.
Teacher: And they:
Student: Tienen.
Teacher: Tienen. And we:
Student: Tenemos.
Teacher: Tenemos. So the -go is only popping up for the I version. What was to come?
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. Good. I come:
Student: Vengo.
Teacher: Vengo. So here we have the -go again. But he comes:
Student: Viene.
Teacher: Viene. They come:
Student: Vienen.
Teacher: You (informal):
Student: Vienes.
Teacher: We:
Student: Venemos- venimos.
Teacher: Venimos. Good. So we have this -go popping up just for the I form. We've seen other verbs like
   this. What was to go out or to leave?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. And I go out or I leave:
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. To put:
Student: Poner.
Teacher: Poner. And I put:
Student: Pongo.
Teacher: Pongo. Good. We have decir, to say or to tell and we get digo, which is even more irregular but
   we see the -go. We have hacer, to make or to do, and we get hago. Oír, which means to hear, oír.
   And we have oigo, I hear. Traer, traer means to bring. And I bring is traigo. So, to bring is t-r-
   a-e-r, traer, and then I is traigo. It takes an extra i. So here we get traigo. Traer is interesting
   because traer means to bring. But when it forms part of another verb, we can translate it like -tract.
   For example, extraer means:
Student: Extract.
Teacher: Good. How would you say attract?
Student: Atraer.
Teacher: Atraer. Contract:
Student: Contraer.
Teacher: Distract:
Student: Distraer.
Teacher: Good. I distract:
Student: Distraigo.
Teacher: Distraigo. I distract. Or you could say I get distracted. Me distraigo. Good. So these -go verbs
   are a little bit special and they behave quite irregularly. But more or less in the same way. One of
   the things they do in the same way is that in the mood tense, instead of switching vowels like the
   rest of the verbs do in the mood tense in the present, they go from -go to -ga. So whilst in the
   normal present this -go only pops up for I, we have tengo/tiene/tienes/tienen/tenemos, the -ga for
   the mood sense is for everybody. So we get tenga for I, he/she/it and you formal. How would you
   make it informal?
Student: Tengas.
Teacher: Exactly. So if you were to say I want you to come, I want that you come, speaking informally - so
   I want that:
Student: Quiero que.
Teacher: Good. Now we want you come and we want the mood tense version. So it's a -go verb, so our base
   for the mood tense is venga. So if you want to speak informally and say I want that you come, I
   want you to come:
Student: Quiero que vengas.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero que vengas. And you will hear actually in Spain venga, venga, venga. They
   use it all the time, meaning come on, come on. Venga vale. They say vale as well in Spain. Venga
   vale. You will hear this all the time. When a Spanish person is hanging up the telephone you can
   hear fifteen of them, venga vale, vale venga, venga vale. So this venga that you will hear around
   a lot will be a nice hook to remember that this -go goes to -ga. Actually, when somebody is
   answering the phone in Spain, you might hear diga or dígame. What does that mean, dígame?
Student: Tell me.
Teacher: Yes. The mood tense by itself is an order. For a positive order then we have the me after the verb,
   dígame. So you will hear people answering the phone like this in Spain. Tell me. Dígame. So
   traer was to bring. What is I bring?
Student: Traigo.
Teacher: Traigo. And what is you bring, speaking informally?
Student: Traigas.
Teacher: This is the mood tense. But we don't want the mood tense, we just want you bring informally.
Student: Traes.
Teacher: Traes. Good. But if you say I want you to bring it, how would you say that? I want you to bring
   it, informally:
Student: Quiero que lo traigas.
Teacher: Very good. Quiero que lo traigas. I don't want you to distract me, I don't want you to distract me,
   still informal:
Student: No quiero que me distraigas.
Teacher: Very good. No quiero que me distraigas. I don't want you to distract me. Very good.
 Spanish Track 85
Teacher: We can identify this group of -go verbs and expect them to go to -ga when they are in the
   subjunctive or the mood tense. So I leave from salir is:
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. And if I want to tell somebody leave (formally):
Student: Salga.
Teacher: Salga. And if I want to tell more than one person:
Student: Salgan.
Teacher: Good, and if I want to tell them don't leave:
Student: No salgan?
Teacher: No salgan. Good. Poner was to put. I put:
Student: Pongo.
Teacher: Pongo, good. Lets speak formally, put it here, put it here:
Student: Lo ponga aquí.
Teacher: And where does that lo go with positive commands?
Student: Póngalo aquí.
Teacher: Good. Póngalo aquí. But don't put it here:
Student: No lo ponga aquí.
Teacher: Very good. No lo ponga aquí. We saw with regular verbs that we have a shortcut where we don't
   use the mood tense for informal positive commands. So if I want to tell you to eat I can just say
   come, I go to comes and I drop the s, come. If I want to tell you to find it I can go to encontrar,
   encuentras, I can drop the s, encuéntralo. That’s our shortcut for informal positive commands
   where we don't use the mood tense. With these -go verbs, to make that shortcut you just drop the
   -go, so for example, how do you say I have from tener?
Student: Tengo.
Teacher: Tengo. If you want to tell somebody informally have, you just drop the -go:
Student: Ten.
Teacher: Ten. Have it:
Student: Tenlo.
Teacher: Yes. Tenlo.
Student: So we don't see tenga?
Teacher: For formal, but we are now looking at the shortcut that we have for informal, so how would you
   say have it, speaking formally?
Student: Téngalo.
Teacher: Téngalo. But informally we are not using the mood tense, we have a short cut, it's just different to
   the short cut we learnt before, the short cut is just dropping the -go, tenlo. A nice way to remember
   this is how you will see people in many Spanish speaking countries answering the phone, either
   dígame, formally, or dime informally. What is I come?
Student: Vengo.
Teacher: And how do you tell somebody formally to come?
Student: Venga.
Teacher: Venga. Now how would you make it informal?
Student: Ven.
Teacher: Ven. Good. So I should mention that the venga that you hear in Spain as come on is not necessarily
   formal, it’s lost that feeling of formality because its like a fixed expression, so venga, venga you
   hear all the time, and then ven will sound much more like come, physically come, rather than come
   on; venga, venga, venga is used like come on. What was to leave or to go out?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. I leave or I go out:
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. Leave, speaking informally:
Student: Sal.
Teacher: Sal. We can just drop the -go. I say or I tell is digo. If you want to say tell me formally, how is it?
Student: Dígame.
Teacher: Dígame. If you want to make that same command informally, how will it be?
Student: Dime.
Teacher: Dime. Good. So both things you hear when people answer the phone in Spain - dime, dígame -
   and in other countries, in other Spanish speaking countries as well. So for -go verbs they will go
   to -ga to form the mood tense and for the orders, the short cut for the informal positive order they
   will just drop this -go. So if you want to say tell me when you come, speaking informally, how
   would that be?
Student: Dime cuando vengas.
Teacher: Good. After cuando we are using the mood tense because we are referring to the future. Dime
   cuando vengas. Tell me when you come. How would you say tell me when you do it - and lets
   speak formally now? Tell me when you do it, speaking formally:
Student: Dígame cuando lo haga.
Teacher: Very good. Dígame cuando lo haga. Good.
Spanish Track 86
Teacher: These -go verbs, these verbs that take -go instead of -o for the I version in the present, also behave
   a little bit strangely in the future tenses. In the will and would tenses. So, we can look at that now,
   and whilst looking at it, revise the endings that we learned for will and would. So we said that our
   will endings, what we add on to the to form of the verb to get will, are the same as those very
   irregular versions of haber in the present. So we can make that connection to help us internalize
   them. Can you talk me through those will endings?
Student: So it’s -e for I and -emos for us.
Teacher: For we, very good.
Student: For we. -a for he, she, it, and you formal, -an for they.
Teacher: They or you plural, and the last one, you informal?
Student: -as.
Teacher: Good. So we have the endings. And our endings for would, which again we are adding on to the
   to form of the verb, we need to remember one key sound for would. If we remember how to say I
   would like, that’s a nice hook to remember the key sound. So what is the key sound?
Student: -ía.
Teacher: -ía. And then on to -ia we can add on, of course, our -mos or -n or -s if we need to. Good. So -go
   verbs, these verbs that have -go and then -ga for the mood tense, when they are building the futures,
   they have a contraction. But, they all make the same contraction. For example, I will have is
   tendré. Tendré.
Student: Tendré.
Teacher: Tendré. So, of course, it should be “teneré”, but it’s tendré. So that last e of tener turns into a d,
   and we get tendré. This is a contraction because it means we end up with two syllables instead of
   three. It would be “teneré”, but it’s tendré. Which just makes everything a little bit more efficient.
   But all of these verbs, these -go verbs, are behaving in a similar way. So we have to come:
Student: Venir.
Teacher: Venir. And I will come:
Student: Vendré.
Teacher: Vendré. Very good. I would come - the same contraction for both futures:
Student: Vendría.
Teacher: Vendría. Good. I would come. We would come:
Student: Vendríamos.
Teacher: Vendríamos. We would come later, but we don’t have time. We would come later, but we don’t
   have time:
Student: Vendríamos más tarde, pero no tenemos tiempo.
Teacher: Good. Vendríamos más tarde, pero no tenemos tiempo. What was to put?
Student: Poner.
Teacher: And I put:
Student: Pongo.
Teacher: Pongo. So this -go alerts us to the fact that this verb will behave in this irregular way as well. So
   if you want to say I will put it here, how will it be? I will put it here:
Student: Lo pondré aquí.
Teacher: Good. Lo pondré aquí. I would put it here, I would put it here:
Student: Lo pondría aquí.
Teacher: Good. We would put it here:
Student: Lo pondríamos aquí.
Teacher: Good. Lo pondríamos aquí. And we will put it here:
Student: Lo pondremos aquí.
Teacher: Good. Lo pondremos aquí. What was to leave or to go out?
Student: Salir.
Teacher: Salir. I leave or I go out:
Student: Salgo.
Teacher: Salgo. So again this -go can set off our little alarm bell that this verb will probably be irregular in
   the futures. So how would you say I would leave or I would go out?
Student: Saldría.
Teacher: Saldría. Good. You would leave or you would go out (informally):
Student: Saldrías.
Teacher: Saldrías. Will you leave? Will you go out tonight? Will you go out tonight?:
Student: ¿Saldrías esta noche?
Teacher: That’s would you, now we want will you:
Student: ¿Saldrás esta noche?
Teacher: Good. ¿Saldrás esta noche? But of course we have esta noche which is future context so we could
   just use the present. We could just say You go out tonight? We don’t need the future, so how would
   that be?
Student: ¿Sales esta noche?
Teacher: ¿Sales esta noche? Good. So for most -go verbs, we take off the -go and we put -dré for I will
   and -dría for I would, in most of them. Traer, to bring, doesn’t do it. Traeré, I will bring. Atraeré,
   I will attract. Distraeré, I will distract. But most of these that have -go will go to -dría or -dré.
   Hacer and decir, to do or to make or to say or to tell, hacer and decir are particularly irregular.
   And we’ve already seen this. We’ve seen how after haber they become hecho and dicho. It’s very
   irregular. We saw how the informal command from hacer is haz, h-a-z. Again irregular, and here
   as well. I will do is haré. So it’s not following this rule. It’s even more irregular. We have haré.
   Haré. I will do or I will make.
Student: Haré.
Teacher: H-a-r-e. Haré. And all we need to do is identify one of these irregularities and then we understand
   that all of will and all of would will use this same base, the same base that haré has used.
   So we will do or we will make is:
Student: Haremos.
Teacher: Good. And we would do or we would make:
Student: Haríamos.
Teacher: Haríamos. We would do it, but we’re busy now. We would do it, but we’re busy now: Student:
   Lo haríamos, pero estamos-
Teacher: Occupied.
Student: Ocupados ahora.
Teacher: Good. Lo haríamos, pero estamos ocupados ahora. We would do it, but we’re busy now. So
   haríamos is we would do or we would make, and what is we will do or we will make?
Student: Haremos.
Teacher: Haremos. And they will do, they will make:
Student: Harán.
Teacher: Harán. I would say or I would tell is diría. So we get from decir, diría. I would say, he would say,
   she would say, you (formal) would say:
Student: Diría.
Teacher: So like I said, we just need one of these versions to understand how the rest will be. So if diría is
   I would say or I would tell, how is I will say or I will tell?
Student: Diré.
Teacher: Diré. I will tell you later (speaking informally):
Student: Te diré más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Te diré más tarde. And of course, having future context with más tarde, we could just
   say:
Student: Te digo más tarde.
Teacher: Good. Te digo más tarde. I tell you later. What was to be able to?
Student: Poder.
Teacher: Poder. How do you say I would be able to or I could?
Student: Podría.
Teacher: Podría. Good. The /e/ falls out. So this is a different irregularity. This is not a -go verb. Podría.
   Of course it was “podería”, but many years of “podería, podería, podería, podería”, the /e/ fell
   away. Podría. How is to put?
Student: Poner.
Teacher: Poner. And I would put:
Student: Pondría.
Teacher: Pondría. Good. So there’s a subtle difference in sound between I would be able to, podría, and I
   would put, pondría. We would be able to:
Student: Pondríamos.
Teacher: We would be able to. That’s we would put.
Student: Podríamos.
Teacher: Podríamos. And we would put:
Student: Pondríamos.
Teacher: Pondríamos.
 Spanish Track 87
Teacher: Looking at the past tenses, the line in the past and the dot in the past, the line in the past is extremely
   regular. We only have a few odd irregular verbs for the line in the past. Ser is one of them and we
   can remember by thinking of an era. So what is the base for ser as a line in the past?
Student: Era.
Teacher: Era. Good. So this means I was, you (formal) were, he/she/it was, as a line in the past. How would
   you say we were?
Student: Éramos.
Teacher: Éramos. Good. The accent doesn’t move. Éramos. They were or you guys were:
Student: Eran.
Teacher: Eran. And you informal?
Student: Eras.
Teacher: Eras. Good. We had the line in the past of ir, which was a little bit like a mix between the -aba
   ending that we have for -ar verbs for the line in the past and the -ía ending that we have for -er/-ir
   verbs in the line in past. So what was I was going from ir?
Student: Iba.
Teacher: Very good. Iba. We were going:
Student: Íbamos.
Teacher: You informal:
Student: Ibas.
Teacher: And they or you guys:
Student: Iban.
Teacher: Iban. Good. And then we had ver, to see. How is I see, in the present?
Student: Veo.
Teacher: Veo. And this extra e that it keeps for the I form in the present, veo, carries over into the line in the
   past. So I was seeing, you (formal) were seeing, he/she/it were seeing is veía.
Student: Veía.
Teacher: Veía. So we were seeing:
Student: Veíamos.
Teacher: You informal:
Student: Veías.
Teacher: And they:
Student: Veían.
Teacher: Good. So the line in the past is a very safe tense. We just have a few irregular verbs, but for the
   rest we can be very certain that taking off the -ar and putting -aba, or taking off the -er/-ir and
   putting -ía is going to give us the result that we want. The point in the past is less regular, less
   reliable. There are a group of verbs in the dot of the point in the past which are irregular, but they
   all do something very similar. Now most of the verbs in this group are -go verbs, but not all of
   them. Now what these verbs do in the point in the past is that firstly, the beginning bit of the verb
   - so for example, if we have poder - that beginning bit, pod-, changes and we already saw this.
   We saw, for example, they were able was pudieron. So that pod- changes to pud-. Here it’s a little
   change, but there are more drastic changes with other verbs. So this is the first thing. The base of
   the verb that is left once we take the endings off changes. Sometimes radically, sometimes a little
   bit like here from pod- to pud-. The second thing that they do is that they use a mixture of the point
   endings from -ar verbs and from -er/-ir verbs. They use a mixture of the two endings from both
   sides, but always the same mixture for each of these irregular verbs. And the third thing they do is
   to not have the accent on the endings. So firstly, let’s revise the point in the past with hablar and
   comer. Just to refresh what are these endings. So we have hablar to speak, and I spoke is:
Student: Hablé.
Teacher: Good. And he spoke or she spoke or you (formal) spoke:
Student: Habló.
Teacher: Habló. And then we had to eat which was comer. And I ate:
Student: Comí.
Teacher: Comí. And he ate or she ate or you (formal) ate, it ate - habló and then with comer it’s:
Student: Comió.
Teacher: Comió. Good. Back to hablar. How was we spoke?
Student: Hablamos.
Teacher: Hablamos. Good. Same as the present tense. And they spoke:
Student: Hablaron.
Teacher: Hablaron. And you (informal) spoke - which in the you (informal) version, we hear that informal
   s and the informal t in the ending:
Student: Hablaste.
Teacher: Hablaste. Good. Back to comer. How is we ate?
Student: Comemos. Comimos.
Teacher: Comimos. They ate or you guys ate:
Student: Comieron.
Teacher: Comieron. And you (informal) ate:
Student: Comiste.
Teacher: Very good. Comiste. So that’s the panorama of our dot in the past, but these irregular verbs use a
   mixture of these two groups for different endings in the point in the past. For example, tener, to
   have. In the point in the past, the way that ten- changes, that root changes, we said that’s the first
   thing that happens. The ten- of tener becomes tuv-. T-u-v.
Student: Tuv-.
Teacher: And I had is tuve. And he/she/it had is tuvo. So we are not accenting the endings. Tuve. Tuvo.
   So where are these two endings coming from, -e and -o? Are they coming from the -ar verbs or
   from the -er/-ir verbs?
Student: -ar.
Teacher: Good. So we have tuve and tuvo. So these two endings for I and for he/she/it/you formal come
   from -ar and the rest come from -er/-ir. So how would you say we had with the point in the past?
Student: Tuvimos.
Teacher: Tuvimos. And you (informal):
Student: Tuviste.
Teacher: Tuviste. And they:
Student: Tuvieron.
Teacher: Tuvieron. Good. So now that we have worked our way through this one verb, all we need to do
   for the other ones is to find the base. The irregular base for the verb and then we know what to do
   with it. What was to be, for states?
Student: Estar.
Teacher: Estar. Now I was, the point in the past, from estar is estuve. So it’s nice to look at tener and estar
   together because we have tuve for I had and estuve for I was.
Student: Estuve.
Teacher: And I wasn’t:
Student: No estuve.
Teacher: Good. He was, she was, you were (formal):
Student: Estuvo.
Teacher: Good. We were:
Student: Estuvimos.
Teacher: Estuvimos. You were (informally):
Student: Estuviste.
Teacher: Estuviste. Where were you?:
Student: ¿Dónde estuviste?
Teacher: ¿Dónde estuviste? They were, you guys were:
Student: Estuvieron.
Teacher: Estuvieron. Where were you guys?:
Student: ¿Dónde estuvieron?
Teacher: Good. ¿Dónde estuvieron? So whilst we have these irregular forms, which need a little bit more
  effort, many times you can just use the line in the past instead. So if you say something like ¿dónde
  estuviste? - where were you? - and here we’re using a point in time, so maybe it sounds like where
  were you in this precise moment when we needed you?, but even so we could still just use the line
  in the past to get around this irregular tense. Now we don’t want to avoid it forever. Anything that
  we don’t control, of the line which will end up controlling us. Anything we are uncertain of that
  we don’t take the control of, will control us. But, many times you’re in a conversation and you
  don’t have time to find that irregular form and maybe you want to worry about it later and check
  or think about what it was. In that case, you can just turn to the line in the past. ¿Dónde estabas?
  instead of ¿dónde estuviste? So how would you say I had to go using this point in the past? So
  how is I had, using the point in the past?
Student: Tuve.
Teacher: Good. So I had to go:
Student: Tuve que ir.
Teacher: Good. So tuve que ir, you would want to use it if you meant that in one precise moment you know
  something happened and I had to go: tuve que ir. But, you could also use the line in the past and
  not have any problem there if you wanted to avoid this irregular tense just to get the meaning
   across. So you can just say tenía que ir, which is regular, to avoid using this irregular tense. What
   was to say or to tell?
Student: Decir.
Teacher: Decir or contar, but decir we are working with for now. So dec- becomes dij- in the point in the
   past. Dij-. D-i-j. What is I said?
Student: Dije.
Teacher: Dije. He said:
Student: Dijo.
Teacher: Good. We said:
Student: Dijimos.
Teacher: Dijimos. Good. So they’re using the same endings, this group of irregular verbs. -e and -o from
   the -ar group and then the rest of the endings from the -er/-ir group for the point in the past.
   Spanish Track 88
Teacher: What was to put?
Student: Poner.
Teacher: Poner. I was putting, the line in the past:
Student: Ponía.
Teacher: Ponía. Good. Now if you want to say I put, the point in the past, I put in the past of course in
   English it doesn’t change. I put. Present. I put. Past. I put for the past, our base is pus-, pus-. P-u-
   s.
   So how would you say I put?
Student: Pusé.
Teacher: Puse.
Student: Ah, puse.
Teacher: The endings don’t take the accent here for these irregular verbs. Puse. You put, informally:
Student: Pusiste.
Teacher: Where did you put it?:
Student: ¿Dónde lo pusiste?
Teacher: ¿Dónde lo pusiste? Good. And now we can see where that poner -pose was coming from. We
   said that when we have poner as part of a verb in Spanish, it’s -pose in English. Componer,
   compose. Exponer, expose. Oponer, oppose. And now we hear this -pose sound coming out in
   the dot in the past: puse, pusiste. What was to do or to make?
Student: Hacer.
Teacher: The base here in this point in the past is hic-. H-i-c. So if you want to say I made or I did:
Student: Hice.
Teacher: And he made or he did:
Student: Hizo.
Teacher: Hizo. Here it would be h-i-z-o. We can’t keep the c, because it would spell “hico”. Hizo. They
  made or you guys made:
Student: Hicieron.
Teacher: Good. Whenever you identify one of these irregular verbs in the point in the past where the base
  of the verb has changed, then you know what to do with it. That end -o is coming from -ar and
  then you have -imos, -iste, ieron from -er/-ir. Sometimes the change is subtle. We saw that pod-
  of poder became pud-. We saw in another lesson that hab- of haber became hub-. Ven- of venir,
  becomes vin-. So how would you say I came?
Student: Vine.
Teacher: And he came:
Student: Vino.
Teacher: You know how to say wine in Spanish?
Student: Vino.
Teacher: He came with wine:
Student: Vino con vino.
Teacher: Vino con vino. Traer, to bring has traje, I brought in the past. So how would you say he brought?
Student: Trajo.
Teacher: Good. We brought:
Student: Trajimos.
Teacher: Trajimos. And I brought again:
Student: Traje.
Teacher: And traje also means suit like the kind you wear. And it’s masculine. So I brought a suit would
  be:
Student: Traje un traje.
Teacher: Traje un traje. Vino con vino. Traje un traje. There’s one extra irregular past point to look at.
   It’s extra irregular because it doesn’t really follow these rules about what groups it’s taking the
   sounds from, and it’s also extra irregular because it is the past for both ser and ir. It is the past for
   both I was and I went. And this is fui. F-u-i. Fui.
Student: Fui.
Teacher: Fui. So fui means I was from ser, point in the past, and it also means I went. So ser and ir in the
   point in the past, they share a past. Fui means I was or I went. And fue means he was, she was, it
   was, you were or went. So we see that it’s extremely irregular. Fui. I was or I went. How would
   you say I didn’t go?
Student: No fui.
Teacher: No fui. Fue, he was or he went. How would you say he didn’t go?
Student: No fue.
Teacher: No fue. How would you say we went?
Student: Fuimos.
Teacher: Good. And you (informal):
Student: Fuiste.
Teacher: Fuiste. Now to make they or you (plural) was or went, we would add on -ieron, but we will find it
   very difficult to pronounce “fuieron”, “fuieron”. So the /i/ sound, the i fell away. So how would
   that sound?
Student: Fueron.
Teacher: Fueron. So the i, the /i/ sound, falls away. Fueron. The same thing happens in a couple of other
   cases too. We have trajeron from traer, to bring. They brought, you guys brought, trajeron.
   Dijeron, they or you guys said. So a couple of other examples there of that i falling away, just for
   sound reasons. “Trajieron”, “dijieron” is kind of difficult to say so it fell away for efficiency:
   dijeron, trajeron, fueron. So now that we have fueron, we can make the past mood tense. We
   can say something like if I were you because we always go from the they form of the point in the
   past. So if they went or they were is fueron, we can say if I were you and of course we’re using the
   mood tense here because we have if going into the past hypothetically. So this is a mood tense that
   is quite specific for the past. We are not putting the mood tense after si, after if in the present. But
   for this hypothetical past, if I were you, there we have it in English as well as in Spanish. We said
   that if I were you instead of “if I was you” is mood tense in English. So how would that be? If I
   were you:
Student: Fueron becomes fueran.
Teacher: Good.
Student: And the I version is fuera.
Teacher: Good.
Student: “Si fuera ti”.
Teacher: Now it’s just the word for you.
Student: Tú.
Teacher: Tú or usted depending on who we’re talking to. So si yo fuera tú. Si fuera tú or si yo fuera tú,
   si yo fuera usted, if I were you. Now we are understanding why we went from the they version to
   find the mood tense in the past. Because going from the they version instead of the to form means
   that if there is some irregularity, we will transfer that irregularity over into the mood tense. So we
   went from fueron to fuera and we will go from, for example, dijeron, they spoke, to dijera so we
   carry over that irregularity of having lost that i. Trajeron, they brought and then trajera for the
   mood tense. I had was tuve. What was they had or you guys had?
Student: Tuvieron.
Teacher: Tuvieron. So now we can say if I had it, I would tell you. If I had it, I would tell you:
Student: Si lo tuviera.
Teacher: I would tell you. You can use contar. Decir is very irregular for would. So if you don’t want to
   deal with that now, imagine you’re in a real life context, you can just go to the more regular verb,
   which is contar. I would tell you, informally:
Student: Te contaría.
Teacher: Good. Si lo tuviera, te contaría, or te lo contaría. I would tell you it. We like to close with this it
   in Spanish a lot. Si lo tuvieria, te lo contaría, I would tell you it. So we have to do or to make
   which is hacer, and we said that the root for the point in the past is hic-. H-i-c for the I version. So
   how would you say I made or I did?
Student: Hice.
Teacher: Hice. And they did or they made:
Student: Hicieron.
Teacher: Hicieron. Good. So you could say I wanted for them to do it. I wanted that they did it:
Student: Quería que lo hicieran.
Teacher: Good. I wanted them to do it. I wanted that they do it. Quería que lo hicieran. How would you
   say I wanted for us to do it, I wanted that we do it, that we did it?
Student: Quería que lo hiciéramos.
Teacher: Good. Well done. Quería que lo hiciéramos. Good. I’m not as interested here in installing, let’s
   say, all of this content, all of these irregular verbs. All I want to give you is an exposure to how
   they might work. The irregular verbs that you can come across, so that practicing, you can manage
   them. So you should not be afraid of making mistakes. You should build the verbs how you are
   used to and if you suspect that this one might be irregular, check. Check with the person that you
   are speaking to.
  Spanish Track 89
Teacher: So in the spirit of looking at irregularities in Spanish and how to deal with them and how to identify
   them, I wanted to spend a little bit of time speaking about making your own rules. We’ve taught
   you a great amount of Spanish for you to be very conversational and reach fluency just through
   practice and listening in a very short amount of time, if you get practicing. But we haven’t looked
   at every single piece of content of Spanish, of course, but the content that we’ve looked at has
   taken from every area of the language in an analytical way which will allow you to make your own
   rules when you come across things that you don’t quite understand whilst you’re practicing and
   exposing yourself to Spanish. So I just want to experiment a little bit in regards to that with you
   now. So I will present you with some imaginary situations where you see the language behaving
   in certain ways and I want you to make your own rule. Now it doesn’t mean it’s necessarily your
   own. Somebody else might have come up with it before, but that you will figure out for yourself
   what is going on. So for example, the word for too, as in t-o-o is demasiado.
   Demasiado.
Student: Demasiado.
Teacher: It is a bit of a long word, but if you break it up it’s easier to digest. You have de más, of more, -iado.
   And this is too, t-o-o, as in too many. Actually de más can be used by itself if you say tengo
   cuatro de más. I have four of more, tengo cuatro de más. It means I have four too many. I have
   four spare. I have four extra. So demasiado means too. Now imagine you hear these following
   sentences and I want you to work out what’s happening here. Why this word is behaving differently
   in different circumstances. So you might hear demasiadas casas. You might hear demasiados
   coches. And you might hear demasiado agresivo, demasiado agresiva, and demasiado
   agresivos. Again. You might hear demasiadas casas, demasiados coches. Here it’s changing
   from the base form demasiado. Demasiadas casas. Demasiados coches. And then here it’s not.
   Demasiado agresivo. Demasiado agresiva. Demasiado agresivos. So why in one situation is it
   changing and why in the other situation is it not?
Student: The only difference I see is that it’s related to nouns in the first two examples and in the second
   two it’s related to something descriptive.
Teacher: Adjectives.
Student: Adjectives.
Teacher: Espectacular. Well done. Brilliant. That’s it. We said that identifying what type of word we have
   will mostly be all we need to do to figure out what’s going on. So we understand from this that
   when demasiado goes with a noun, it will change to match it: demasiadas casas, demasiados
   coches. But when it goes with an adjective it won’t: demasiado agresivo, demasiado agresiva,
   demasiado agresivos, demasiado agresivas. It’s not changing. So we didn’t learn that here, but
   we have been analytical enough of the language for you to figure that out by yourself. So another
   example for you to figure out what’s going on. Now the words ala, wing, agua, water and aula,
   hole or classroom are all feminine words, but we say el ala, the wing. El agua, the water. And el
   aula, the classroom. What’s going on?
Student: Is it because the first letter of those words is a, and it would be weird to say “la ala”.
Teacher: You have other words that begin with a where you have la at the beginning, for example la
   alfombra, the carpet. La almohada, the pillow. So you need to find something that’s different
   between la almohada and la alfombra to el agua, el ala, el aula.
Student: Well, the difference in this case is that it’s just two, just two syllables, perhaps.
Teacher: That’s it. There are two syllables and they begin and end in a. So it’s a very specific thing. It’s not
   something that we are really going to spend time on learning here in this course. Because it’s very
   likely as well that you’ll forget it. So what we have done throughout this course is given you the
   analytical skills to work it out by yourself and the confidence to make your own rules. So that’s
   the rule. They are all feminine words, but they take el becuase they are two syllables and they
   begin and end with a. And we know that they are feminine because we say el agua fria. The cold
   water. Fria, not frio. So we know they are actually feminine even though they are taking el. One
   more exercise like this. The word for one is uno. The word for some is alguno. And the word for
   none is ninguno. So we have uno, alguno, ninguno. One, some, none. So if I tell you how many
   do you want, you will reply to me uno. Or if you don’t want any, ninguno. But if I say one man,
   how do I say one man or a man?
Student: Un hombre.
Teacher: Un hombre. And if I say some man, I say algun hombre. And if I say no man, I say ningun
   hombre. So we have uno, alguno and ninguno. No quiero ninguno, quiero uno, quiero alguno.
   But, if I say I want one car, for example. Quiero un coche. Quiero algun coche. No quiero
   ningun coche. So what’s happening there? Why does uno become un and why does alguno
   become algun?
Student: Because a noun is following.
Teacher: Yes, because we have a noun following it and it loses that last o. So uno, alguno, ninguno, become
   un, algun, ningun. And you would notice that it doesn’t happen with the feminine. So we have
   una mujer, a woman. Alguna mujer, some woman. Ninguna mujer, no woman. So the point is
   just this, that we need to analyze the language that we are coming across, trying to pick out
   anything that we don’t understand to tackle it so that we control it and we understand what’s
   happening so that that element of the language doesn’t control us. Very quickly, thinking in this
   way you will get over your technical problems in the language. You will solve your technical
   problems and then when you solve your technical problems in a specific language, then you can
   start to live freely in that language. And become somebody else in that language that is also you,
   but somebody else, because you are using this mechanism or this tool which as we’ve said a few
   times, permits and obliges you to perceive and express the world in a certain way. But before we
   can fully take advantage of that, we want to get over our technical difficulties and this is achieved
   not through memorizing what is correct, but analyzing and understanding what is correct and
   finding why.
Spanish Track 90
Teacher: There are also some variations that you might come across in dialect. For example, in most of
  Spain they use le and les whenever they’re referring to him or her, or you (formal), or you guys, or
  they. So instead of lo and la and los and las, they are using le and les, not just to make to him, to
  her, they will use it always when they’re referring to people and not things. So in most of Spain,
  le veo means I see him or her or you (formal). And lo veo means I see it. But in the great majority
  of the Spanish speaking world this isn’t the case.
  In most of Spain, you have vosotros, which is the you (plural informal), which is only used in
  Spain or most of Spain. But again, nowhere in Latin America so that might be something you want
  to listen out for if you will practice this dialect of Spanish. Many accents have an aspirated s in
  Spanish so you might hear /ehtá/ instead está. /cómo ehtá/ instead of cómo está. /ehpero/ instead
  of espero.
  Around the Río de la Plata, for example, around Montevideo and Buenos Aires and in 30% of the
  Spanish speaking world, used exclusively or mixed with tú, you also have vos. Vos. Another word
  for tú. And the verb conjugations might change slightly. So instead of puedes you might hear
  podés. And because the accent’s coming on the end, that o isn’t splitting. Podés. Instead of
  quieres, querés.
  So you might come across small differences in different dialects of Spanish, but they are minor
  and you now have all of the know-how and experience to identify and understand them. And if
  you want, adopt them, you can adopt these differences. It’s advisable to speak like the people you
  are practicing with, because the more you speak like the Spanish that you are hearing, the more
  you understand. Now if you’re talking with people from different Spanish speaking countries,
  people with different dialects or accents in Spanish, then you might get something like a pan-
  hispanic accent, let’s say, like many native Spanish speakers who move around the Spanish
  speaking world or spend time with Spanish speakers from different countries also have. You might
  even find yourself switching between different accents when you are talking with people from
  different places. Again a phenomenon that we also find occurring amongst native speakers.
  Ahora hablamos español. Ahora somos hispanohablantes. Now we speak Spanish. Now we are
  Spanish speakers. Somos hispanohablantes y sólo tenemos que practicar, hablar y analizar
para perfeccionar nuestro español. My advice now for the end of the course is to spend some
time practicing, to get out and practice and expose yourself to Spanish as much as possible. And
then maybe after a short while of practicing, you might want to repeat the course to refresh and
touch up on anything that you might be unsure of, especially having practiced and being solid on
so many things it will really free up a lot of mental space to home in on the things that you are
more uncertain with. And, in this way, repeating the course might be a little bit like when you
watch a good movie twice and on the second time round you have a different experience.
The most important thing in this journey of exploring and improving your Spanish is to not to
forget to enjoy it, to not obsess with the destination but to enjoy the journey. You are already a
Spanish speaker, you should enjoy it. There is a huge variety of literature, music, and cinema
coming from Spanish speaking countries, so you can enjoy this and at the same time effectively
be studying, but it won’t feel like that. And we must bear in mind also that listening is a separate
skill. You will hear many things that you could think your way through and say and maybe not
understand them. So when you first begin listening, don’t be overwhelmed by the fact that you
don’t understand at the beginning as much as you can speak. All you have to do is insist on
analyzing the language that you are exposed to, breaking it up and seeing what you can learn from
that and although at the beginning it will seem very fast, once you get in the habit of this analysis
and this breaking up of the language in the same way that we were doing when we were building
up to create our sentences, in reverse deconstructing what you hear. The more you do this, the
more Spanish will slow down. It will slow right down and you’ll hear a lot more. So like I said,
don’t be overwhelmed by not understanding a lot at the beginning, insist, enjoy music, watch
movies with subtitles, try to match between the subtitles in English and what you are hearing in
Spanish. And just try to match bits and pieces. If you insist with this, very quickly you will notice
that you are understanding a lot more and that the language appears to slow right down.
Thank you very much for participating in the Language Transfer project just by doing the course.
Please share it. Language Transfer is a completely independent and unfunded project, so we don’t
have any funds for the diffusion of this course. If this course got to you, it’s because somebody
shared it, so please do keep sharing and telling people about this way of learning so that they also
might enjoy this experience for free. All of our courses are completely free to promote language
learning and to allow anybody to have this experience anywhere in the world, but of course the
fact that the courses are free doesn’t mean that we are immune to the world of monetary economics.
We produce courses much slower than what we would like to, due to a lack of funds. So when you
donate, actually what you’re donating is time that we are then able to spend on the construction,
practice, and recording of new courses. If you’d like more information on the Language Transfer
project, what we’re doing, and why, then check out our website www.languagetransfer.org. We
really hope you enjoy using your new language and the new world that it opens up to you. Strangely
the same one that was there all along.
