French Track 1 - Level: Beginner
Teacher: Okay, so usually we, we have an introduction trackexplaining the method and the project, but I suspected we might belosing quite a few learners this way, so we can just jump right intolearning French. I do need to tell you a little bit about how we’regoing to learn, though, and that’s just basically that you need torelax and simply follow this conversation that we’re having like youwould with a friend, just that now that friend is me, and when I askyou something, you will think it out and reply, as you would in anyother conversation.
Teacher: I’ll be speaking to a real student... Hello.
Student: Hello.
Teacher: ...who is here with me, and you should get in the habit ofreplying when he does, and any other advice that you might need tofollow the course will be given as we go along.
Teacher: I wanted to begin by speaking about how in Englishwe already use a lot of French, in English. English as a language, iskind of half Germanic and half Latin. Somewhere there in themiddle, you know, a lot of the time we have two words to say thesame thing, and one sounds formal, and the other one soundsinformal, and, you know, one is, the formal one is Latin and theinformal one is Germanic. You know, you could have, for example,to ask, which is very Germanic, and then to enquire, you know,which is very Latin. That Latin word is often going to sound like aFrench word.
Teacher: So we already speak or use a lot of French in ourEnglish even though we may not realise it. For example, the wordfor cake in French is gâteau.
Student: Gâteau.
Teacher: Gâteau. And of course we have this in English, no? But inEnglish ‘gateau’ describes a type of cake. In French it’s just aneveryday word for cake. Gâteau. Or the cake, le, le gâteau.
Student: Le gâteau.
Teacher: Le gâteau. Or we have the word coffee in English,which is café in French. Café, meaning both coffee or a coffee shopyou know, like where you go to drink coffee.
Student: Café.
Teacher: So if le gâteau is the cake, le gâteau, how might you saythe coffee?
Student: Le café.
Teacher: Le café. Very good. So for the students listening to therecording, you would have had a second or two pause there torespond like the student here with me and say le café. But youshould get in the habit of pausing, even though you might not needto yet, you should get in the habit of pausing, thinking out slowly andcalmly your response, saying it out loud and then continuing to seewhat the student here with me has said, and in this way participatein the class.
Teacher: I want in French, I want, is je veux.
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: Je veux. So we have I, je, and then veux, for want. Andthis veux is actually connected to the word ‘volunteer’. A volunteeris the one who wants to do, they are doing something just out ofwanting. So we get je veux in French. I want.
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: So je is I, and that’s spelt JE, and then we have veux forwant, and je and veux are actually two different vowel sounds, twoslightly different vowel sounds. Although they may sound the samewhen people speak fast, but we have one sound in je and anothervowel sound in veux.
Teacher: So give me again I want?
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: Je veux.
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: Very good. I want the cake?
Student: Je veux le gâteau.
Teacher: Good. And le is spelt LE, just like je which is spelt JE, andthat’s the same vowel sound there. Le, je. So give it another try.
Student: Je veux le gâteau.
Teacher: Very good. Je veux le gâteau. I want the coffee?
Student: Je veux le café.
Teacher: Je veux le café.
Teacher: If you want to say it, like I want it, well the word for it is thesame as the word for the, which was?
Student: Le.
Teacher: Le. But we have it first. We say I it want. We put itbefore want in French. So if we want to say I want it, in French wesay I it want. How would that be?
Student: Le, eh… so, je le veux.
Teacher: Je le veux. Very good. I want it. Je le veux. You want is tuveux. Tu veux.
Student: Tu veux.
Teacher: Now, depending on the accent in French and alsodepending on your ear, you might hear something like a CH to yourear here.
Teacher: It might sound like chua little bit. Or maybe like atsiu, with a little bit of an S in Canada for example. And the usound here might be a bit unfamiliar for English speakers. Tu.
Student: Tu.
Teacher: We point our lips out there when we make that u.
Teacher: So you want is tu veux.
Student: Tu veux.
Teacher: How would you say you want the cake?
Student: Tu veux le gâteau.
Teacher: Very good. Tu veux le gâteau. And you can make that intoa question in French just by making it sound like a question. So wejust can make a question tone with our voice, no, to get thequestion. Do you want the cake? How would that be?
Student: Tu veux… tu veux le gâteau?
Teacher: Tu veux le gâteau? How would you say you want it?
Student: Tu le veux.
Teacher: Tu le veux. Very good. Do you want it?
Student: Tu le veux?
Teacher: Very good. Just with your voice, no? Tu le veux?
Student: Tu le veux?
Teacher: Very good. So we’ve seen, we can pull some words intoFrench, or back into French, from Latin English. Words like gâteau,café, and also relate words that might seem unrelated but in factare related, like veux for want and 'volunteer', the one who wants.
Teacher: We can also learn some tricks to convert hugegroups of words into French from our Latin English, or our FrenchEnglish. Now, whenever we have an -ION word in English, likeinvitation, opinion, participation, we can identify this word as comingfrom Latin by its -ION ending. Which means it is probably the samein French, as most of Latin English came to English through French.
Teacher: So for example collection in French is collection.Collection.
Student: Collection.
Teacher: Now, it’s spelt the same, but we notice an S sound insteadof the shthat we have in English. Collection, and in Frenchcollection, like with an S. And we also notice that the N is barelyheard, barely pronounced or not heard. But it’s not exactly silent.We don’t ignore it totally, we do think about that N. We kind of finishthere. Collection, no? Which affects the sounds before but we don’treally hear the N, so collection.
Student: Collection.
Teacher: We like, we’re going towards the N but we don’t, we don’tget there. But it’s not silent as is often said.
Teacher: How might you say organisation?
Student: Organisation.
Teacher: That’s it. Organisation. Tradition?
Student: Tradition.
Teacher: Tradition. Attraction?
Student: Attraction.
Teacher: Attraction. What was the cake again?
Student: Le gâteau.
Teacher: Le gâteau. The coffee?
Student: Le café.
Teacher: Le café. So, much more like ləthan le. Le café.So we saw how the word for the was le, no? Le café. Le gâteau.And also that we can use this le for it. But the collection is la, lacollection.
Student: La collection.
Teacher: The tradition is la tradition.
Student: La tra… la tradition.
Teacher: This is because French nouns, nouns are words wecan put the in front of, are considered either masculine or feminine.
Teacher: The word itself, rather than the object it refers to,has a gender.
Teacher: The masculine nouns go with le, LE, and thefeminine nouns go with la, LA. What was I want?
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: I want the collection?
Student: Je veux la collection.
Teacher: Je veux la collection. You want?
Student: Tu veux.
Teacher: Very good. Tu veux. Do you want?
Student: Tu veux?
Teacher: Tu veux? The confirmation is la confirmation. Laconfirmation.
Student: La confirmation.
Teacher: So again, we have a la word, no? We have a feminineword. And we notice that apart from the N on the end, we also don’treally hear the N of con-. Confirmation. We don’t ignore it, we stillthink about it. But we don’t really hear it. La confirmation.
Student: La confirmation.
Teacher: Do you want the confirmation?
Student: Tu veux la confirmation?
Teacher: Tu veux la confirmation? So we said that the word for itis the same as the word for the. So if you want to say I want it, andyou mean the confirmation, la confirmation, how would you say Iwant it? I it want in French?
Student: Je la veux.
Teacher: Je la veux. Very good.
Teacher: You want the collection?
Student: Tu veux la collection.
Teacher: Very good. Tu veux la collection. You want it, and wemean la collection?
Student: Tu la veux.
Teacher: Very good. Tu la veux.
Student: Tu la veux.
Student: Tu la veux?
Teacher: Tu la veux? So we just can make a question tone with ourvoice, no? Do you want it? In English we added 'do' there but wedon’t need to worry about that for French. Tu la veux.
Teacher: Now you may be thinking, how will I know whether aword is masculine or feminine? Or before that you may be thinkingwhy the hell are words masculine or feminine? Which is also a goodquestion. But it’s actually much simpler than it might seem to identifythe gender of the word, and it isn’t random. You will notice howcertain endings will show you what gender the word is. So forexample all of the -ion, -ION words, -ion in French, no, just likecollection, tradition, confirmation, all of these go with la. So howmight you say the reservation?
Student: La re... reservation.
Teacher: La reservation. The tradition?
Student: La tradi... tradition.
Teacher: La tradition. The complication?
Student: La complication.
Teacher: Good, and the M here is also kind of slight.
Teacher: La complication. How would you say opinion?Opinion?
Student: Opinion.
Teacher: Good. Opinion. If we say the opinion, as opinion startswith a vowel, we will lose the aof la. So we get'l-apostrophe-opinion', so how, how might that sound?
Student: L’opinion.
Teacher: L’opinion. L’opinion. The organisation?
Student: L’organisation.
Teacher: L’organisation. The passion?
Student: La passion.
Teacher: La passion. And less N. La passion.
Student: La passion.
Teacher: Very good. So you notice we get a lot of different types ofwords with this -ion pattern related to many different areas of life,and we can access them just through our Latin or French English.

French Track 2 - Level: Beginner
Teacher: What was the cake in French? A word we have inEnglish too?
Student: Le gâteau.
Teacher: Le gâteau. I want?
Student: Je veux.
Teacher: Je veux. You want?
Student: Tu veux.
Teacher: Tu veux. I want the cake?
Student: Je veux le gâteau.
Teacher: Je veux le gâteau. I want it?
Student: Je le veux.
Teacher: Je le veux. Do you want it?
Student: Tu le veux?
Teacher: Tu le veux? Very good. And if with this it we mean labaguette for example, how would you say this? Do you want it?
Student: Tu la veux?
Teacher: Tu la veux? Very good. The confirmation, how was theconfirmation?
Student: La confirmation.
Teacher: Good. And we have less N, no? On both of those Ns, a lotless N.
Student: La confirmation.
Teacher: Very good. La confirmation. And also not pronouncingthat N kinda keeps the vowel in a different place in the mouth, whichis much more French. So, also we will notice we'll pronounce moreFrench vowels if we don’t pronounce those Ns. La confirmation.
Teacher: So we, we also saw how these -ion, -ion nouns arefeminine, no? And take la for the. And when we refer to them andwe say it, we use la. How would you say I want the confirmation?
Teacher: Je veux la confirmation. I want it, and we mean theconfirmation?
Student: Je la veux.
Teacher: Je la veux. So we’ve seen how we can access Frenchwords from our English, no, be them odd words that have enteredsuch as gâteau, café, or baguette for example, or big groups ofwords with the same endings, like those -ion words, ending -ION.
Teacher: With our words ending -ation, so -ATION rather thanjust -ION, we can do something else which really expands ourFrench with very little effort, and allows us to literally makethousands of sentences very easily. So, whenever we have an-ation noun, one of those words we put the in front of, no, ending-ation, the confirmation, the organisation, we can generally find theverb, the word we can put to in front of, like to confirm, to organise,very easily.
Teacher: So we have confirmation, for example,confirmation, and if we want the verb to confirm, we just get rid ofthis -ation and we add ER and this is pronounced e. So we getconfirmer. Confirmer. To confirm.
Student: Confirmer.
Teacher: Confirmer. So that’s to confirm, even though to confirm inEnglish is two words, it’s just one idea, and that one idea of toconfirm, no, is one word in French, confirmer.
Teacher: Confirmer. So we don’t have to worry aboutremembering the words here, but just how to find them, and like
Student: Célébration.
Teacher: Célébration. Now, to get to celebrate, we get rid of this-ation and we put ER, which sounds like e.
Student: e.
Teacher: So, to celebrate?
Student: Célébrer. Célébrer.
Teacher: Célébrer. I want to celebrate?
Student: Tu veux célébrer?
Teacher: Good, but the tu is a longer vowel and we should project ita little bit more, poking our lips out and rounding them a little bit. Tu.
Student: Tu.
Teacher: Good. Do you want to celebrate?
Student: Tu veux célébrer?
Teacher: Tu veux célébrer? A little, a little is un peu.
Student: Un peu.
Teacher: Un peu. This is spelt UN, this UN is just un. We think theN, again, we don’t pronounce it, we'll just think about it, it’s there.Un. Like we’re going towards it but we didn’t get there. And thenpeu.
Student: Un peu.
Teacher: And peu is like veux, the same vowel sound there whichwe get with EU.
Teacher: Un peu, a little.
Student: Un peu.
Teacher: Do you want to celebrate a little?
Student: Tu veux célébrer… Tu veux célébrer un peu?
Teacher: Tu veux célébrer un peu? So peu and veux have thesame vowel sound, no, which in both cases is achieved with an EUin writing. How would you say I want to celebrate a little? I want tocelebrate a little?
Student: Je veux célé… Je veux célébrer un peu.
Teacher: Je veux célébrer un peu. So if you are speaking and youwant to express something like to reserve, to invite, you can justcheck with yourself, do we have an -ation word in English to saythat? Reservation, yes. Invitation yes. And if so, then you canprobably find the verb in French.
Teacher: So how would you say participation?
Student: Participation.
Teacher: Participation. To participate?
Student: Participer.
Teacher: Participer. Very good. I want to participate?
Student: Je veux participer.
Teacher: Je veux participer. So the trick here is alsorealising that we know these words, no? You may be, you may bewanting to express something like I want to get involved and not
Teacher: How would you say I want to get involved a little? Iwant to get involved a little?
Student: Je veux participer un peu.
Teacher: Very good. Je veux participer un peu. You want? Justyou want?
Student: Tu veux.
Teacher: Tu veux. Do you want to get involved?
Student: Tu veux participer?
Teacher: Tu veux participer? Do you want to get a little involved?
Student: Tu veux participer un peu?
Teacher: Good. Tu veux participer un peu? And in the same way alittle can work its way into the middle there in English, no, do youwant to get a little involved?, we can do the same in French too, ifwe want. Tu veux un peu participer.
Teacher: How would you say I want to visit? So you would beforgiven for thinking ‘I can’t say that in French!’, but don’t decide tooquickly. We have visitation in English, we don’t use it very often,visitation. Visitation rights for example, for hospital or something, butthat’s enough to make you suspect that you can find to visit inFrench. So, I want to visit?
Student: Je veux visiter.
Teacher: Je veux visiter. Do you want to visit?
Student: Tu veux visiter?
Teacher: Tu veux visiter? Very good.