Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: Italian, Portuguese, French, Romanian, and many more languages, can all be described asdialects of Latin, and because we speak English, we already half-speak Latin. English is like, half-built of Latin. So we can hack this Latin side of English, we can access all of this Latin and just turnthat straight into Italian. So, we can identify some Latin words in English by the way they look. Sofor example, words ending -al, most of the time, they are from Latin. So for example: normal,general, legal. And we can make these words Italian just by adding an -e on the end of them. NowItalian words tend to end in vowels. You will notice this and you can even hear this in Italianaccents in English, no?
Student: Yeah.
Teacher: You might hear them saying ‘turn it off-uh’ or ‘I have a lot-uh’. So this is a phonetic habitof Italian, you will even hear it in the English accent. So we will add an -e onto these words, so toget normal, in Italian, we will say: normale.
Student: Normale.
Teacher: Good. So we have the accent on the second-last syllable, no? On the a – normAle. And thevowels we are pronouncing them clearly, not like English when we say normal when we have theuh-uh sound you know? So we have the o giving us an /oh/ sound like in orange, and the ‘a’ ispronounced /ah/. So how would you say general in Italian?
Student: Generale.
Teacher: Generale. Good. Legal? So the e in Italian is going to be more like elephant – /eh/. Sohow would you say legal?
Student: Legale.
Teacher: So think of the /eh/ of elephant and import that over. Do it slowly. Legale.
Teacher: Legale. Good. Okay, so we have the e, which is like the /eh/ in elephant. This is the samesound that we’re adding onto the end of the words, no? Normale, generale, legale. Illegal, illegal.If we think about how it’s written, we have an i and then an e. But they are both making the samesound in English: ille, ille, illegal. But this won’t happen in Italian. So the i there is like the sound inink, ink. And the e, like in elephant. So how would you say illegal?
Student: Illegale.
Teacher: Very good. Illegale. And you pronounce both e’s as well, ill-eh, ill-eh. Illegale.
Student: Illegale.
Teacher: Very good. Global?
Student: Globale?
Teacher: Globale. Good. And plural? And the u is like /oo/, /oo/.
Student: Globales.
Teacher: Ah, sorry. I meant the word plural. 
Student: Oh!
Teacher: And the u is like /oo/.
Student: Plurale.
Teacher: Plurale. Good. And then we see the vowels in Italian are much more consistent than inEnglish, no? In English the pronunciation can be quite random as we saw with illegal: we have an iand we have an e and they sound the same. But Italian is going to be much more faithful to how it’swritten. The word for ‘is’ or ‘he is’, ‘she is’, ‘it is’, all of that, is è.
Student: È.
Teacher: Now this è is pronounced a little bit smiley. So make a smile and with an open mouthmake ‘eh’. And there you will get the sound. Smile and open mouth – È.
Student: È.
Teacher: A little like the ‘eh’ on ‘yeah’. Like when you say ‘yeah’, but it also stops quite sharply: È.
Student: È.So this means is or it is, he is, she is, all of that.
Student: È.
Teacher: So how would you say ‘it is global’?
Student: È globale.
Teacher: È globale. Good. ‘It is normal’?
Student: È normale.
Teacher: È normale. And I mentioned that this can mean is or it is, he is, she is so this samesentence could mean ‘he is normal’ or ‘she is normal’. How would you say ‘it is natural’? Now toget ‘natural’ in Italian you should think about how it is written. So we don’t include this, forexample, the ‘ch’ sound there that we have in English: natchrul. But in Italian you will pronouncethe ‘t’ like a ‘t’.
Student: È natrale. Naturale.
Teacher: So Italian likes consonant vowel, consonant vowel, so you would really split that up. Solike where in English we eat that u up, natchrul we completely eat it up. But it’s there, so in Italianwe’re going to pronounce that u clearly like an /oo/.
Student: È naturale.
Teacher: È naturale.
Student: È naturale.
Teacher: Good. Now it’s really important to get this è right, because if you don’t do it with a smileyface and an open mouth – è – if you don’t make that sound, and you say e, e that means and. So wehave è for ‘is’ or ‘it is’, ‘he is’, ‘she is’ and e – a much weaker, more closed e – for ‘and’. So if youwere to say something like ‘it’s normal and natural’, how would that be?
Student: È normale e naturale. 
Teacher: Very good. È normale e naturale. So you should listen out for the difference betweenthese two e’s and how open or closed these two different e’s sound really depends on the dialect, sowe just want to be aware of this difference and listen out for it and this is the best way to get muchcloser to the difference between these two sounds. ‘It is not’, ‘he is not’, ‘she is not’ is non è, non è.
Student: Non è.
Teacher: How would you say ‘it’s not ideal’. ‘It’s not ideal’? So let’s start with ‘it is not’.
Student: Non è.
Teacher: And now think of ideal. Think about how it’s written, to get the Italian pronunciation.
Student: I-deal-eh.
Teacher: The i – we don’t pronounce it like i like in ideal do we, how do we pronounce it in Italian?
Student: Ideal-eh.
Teacher: Like ‘ink’.
Student: Ideal-eh.
Teacher: It requires a lot of thought, this one. You have a lot of vowels to think about here. Englishfuses them together. In Italian you will take the time to pronounce each vowel. And then we willstick another e on the end of course for Italian.
Student: Ideale.
Teacher: Good. So how would you say ‘it’s not ideal’?
Student: Non è ideale.
Teacher: Good, but careful not to pronounce two l’s on the end there – ‘Idealle’. No – we want tosay ideal, ideal-eh. Non è ideale. How would you say ‘it’s original’?
Student: È originale.
Teacher: È originale. ‘It’s not original’?
Student: Non è originale.
Teacher: Non è originale. Good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: How would you say ‘real’ in Italian? That ends -al, no?
Student: Reale.
Teacher: Reale. Good. So again we have the e, so it’s like an ‘eh’. So in English we say ‘real’ but an e inItalian is like ‘eh’. Reale.
Student: Reale.
Teacher: ‘Reh’ ‘eh’. So you make more like ‘ree’. And that’s just a transfer coming from English. Okay.So whilst we pick out these Latin words from English, we want to be careful not to transfer over theEnglish sounds at the same time. The letter e is like in elephant.
Student: Reale.
Teacher: Much better. Now, the r in Italian is rolling or flicking. It can also sound quite a bit heavier, thisjust depends on the dialect, more like rruh, rruh. Now many learners might find this soundintimidating, but it’s much more simple than it looks or sounds. The first thing, with dealing withsounds generally, is that’s a really bad idea to worry about it, to be stressed. So forget the idea thatthe sound is difficult and relax the mouth – the most important thing is that, when the mouthproduces sounds, it’s relaxed, so a tense mouth can’t do anything. So, we can forget the fact that ther is rolling and we can just focus on the vowel, on making a nice clear è.
Student: È.
Teacher: Now we put the r before it but we’re still focusing on getting the vowel right, rather thanfocusing on the rolling quality of the r. So we’ve focused on the good è, and then we do ‘è, è, reh’.
Student: È, è, reh.
Teacher: You see, and it puts your tongue in the right position. You can hear a couple of weak flicks therethat come by themselves, no? È, reh. And when your mouth feels naturally relaxed, and the tongueis relaxed, then that happens quite naturally if you’re in the right positive for the e. So that’s the bestway to practice this sound if you have any problem with it. Concentrate on the vowel that comesafterwards. È, reh, é, é, reh. Reale.
Student: È, è, reh, reale.
Teacher: And also careful not to double that l, no, on reale, not realle, reale. How would you say ‘it is realand original’ - it is real?
Student: È reale.
Teacher: And original? And this is the weaker one, the more closed one.
Student: E originale.
Teacher: È reale e originale. Very good. Reale also means ‘royal’. The same in Spanish for example, RealMadrid is not ‘real’ Madrid it is ‘royal’ Madrid. And we have the word for king, as well, connected:ré in Italian.
Student: Ré. 
Teacher: Or ‘the king’ – il ré. And we find this ré around in English as well, like Tyrannosaurus Rexmeans ‘the king of the tyrannical lizards’ or something like that. Also loyal has this same pattern. Soas royal becomes reale, loyal follows that same pattern, it’s a little bit different to loyal, it does thesame as royal – reale, loyal…?
Student: Leale.
Teacher: Leale, good. How would you say ‘he is loyal’ or ‘she is loyal’?
Student: È leale.
Teacher: Good. È leale. And real? What was real again?
Student: Reeale. Reale.
Teacher: Good, better, much better. So we add an e to get the Italian, no? We said that most Italian wordsend in vowels so to get the Italian here we’re adding an e. Real – reale. As well as pronouncing allthe other vowels as they’re written. Now ‘ly’ as in real-ly, no? Really, LY, -ly in Italian, is -mente, -mente. So if we say ‘really’ this -mente ends in a vowel. So we don’t need that extra e that we puton real to get reale. We don’t need that any more when we add this mente to say ‘really’ becausethat already ends in a vowel. So how might that sound, how would that sound, really, if we wantedto say really?
Student: Realmente.
Teacher: Realmente. So the e that we put on the end of real, we don’t need it any more. We’re alreadyending in a vowel, so we lose it. Realmente, really. So how was global?
Student: Globale.
Teacher: Globale. Globally?
Student: Globalmente.
Teacher: Globalmente. Original?
Student: Originalmente.
Teacher: Just original?
Student: Original.
Teacher: But the word by itself, how is it?
Student: Originale.
Teacher: Good. Originally?
Student: Originalmente.
Teacher: Very good. Originalmente. How would you say ‘generally it’s legal’?
Student: Generalmente è legale.
Teacher: We’re still carrying over quite a strong e sound from English, legal, no? So give me again, legal?
Student: Legale.
Teacher: Much better, good. Legale. So ‘generally it’s legal’? 
Student: Generalmente è legale.
Teacher: Generalmente è legale. In English we have quite a Germanic accenting pattern even when weare using Latin words, often. So we say ‘generally’, we have that heavy initial accent ‘GENrelly’and then the rest of the vowels, we kind of swallow them up ‘GENrlly’, no? But Italian won’t dothat. Generalmente, generalmente, naturalmente.
Student: Generalmente.
Teacher: How was normal?
Student: Normale.
Teacher: Good, and normally?
Student: Normalmente.
Teacher: Normalmente. And this you can use like ‘usually’. So you could say ‘usually he’s loyal’, forexample, no? ‘Normally he’s loyal’. So, normally?
Student: Normalmente.
Teacher: He is or she is loyal.
Student: È loyale. Leale.
Teacher: Very good. Normally he’s loyal, normally she’s loyal. Normalmente è leale. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: Words ending -ible and -able in English are also from Latin, unless we stick something on like,you know, unless we say huggable, if ‘somebody is huggable’, then it’s not Latin. But if we saypossible, probable, this is a Latin word. And we can also make this Italian. -ible and -able become -ibile, -ible, and -abile, -abile. So it’s like the vowel sound that we pronounce in English that wedon’t write if you think about it, so that’s very interesting. When we say possible we pronounce avowel between the b and the l: ‘possibul’. There’s a vowel there. But we don’t write it, we have an eon the end that we don’t pronounce, no? But Italian writes it, so -able becomes -abile and -iblebecomes -ibile. -abile, -ibile. So, possible becomes possibile, possibile. But we also pronounce thetwo s’s. Possibile.
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Good. And probable – how would that be – probable?
Student: Probible.
Teacher: Take it slowly, syllable by syllable.
Student: Probabible.
Teacher: Probabile.
Student: Probabile.
Teacher: So it’s just like the English, if you think of the English probable and then you make each of thosevowels more Italian-sounding, so pro-ba-bil, and then you pronounce the e that we don’t pronouncein English. Probabile.
Student: Probabile.
Teacher: Good. So, give me again possible. Take it slowly, I want you to work with the syllables.
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Very good. And it felt good to take it slowly, no? Like more confidence? And probable?
Student: Probable…probaba…probi…probible.
Teacher: Think of how it’s written. How it’s spelt PROBA, probah.
Student: Probah…probabile…probabile. It’s almost like there’s an extra b.
Teacher: There’s two b’s as well in English, just that the vowel between them is so reduced, you can’treally feel them. Probubul. Probubul. But there’s still two b’s there, no? Probable, probabile.
Student: Probabile.
Teacher: Good, so that’s probable. Now how would you say probably? Again, because we add -mente,which has a vowel on the end, we don’t need the final e of probabile. So give it a try.
Student: Probabilmente.
Teacher: Probabilmente. Very good.
Student: Probabilmente. 
Teacher: Very good. So that’s probably. How would you say ‘probably it’s real’, ‘probably it’s real’?
Student: Probabilmente è reale.
Teacher: Probabilmente è reale. Probably it’s original?
Student: Probabilmente è originale.
Teacher: Very good. Probabilmente è originale. Good. Possible, how was possible?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Possibile. And possibly?
Student: Possibilemente.
Teacher: So the e on the end, we don’t need it anymore because -mente ends in a vowel. Possibilmente.
Student: Possiblemente.
Teacher: Slowly. And not from memory but take that time to find it again, take that time.
Student: Possibilmente.
Teacher: Good. Possibilmente.
Student: Possibilmente.
Teacher: How was natural?
Student: Nachurale.
Teacher: Good, but the ch sound is from English, no? Actually we have a t here.
Student: Naturale.
Teacher: Very good. Naturale. Naturally?
Student: Naturalmente.
Teacher: Very good. Naturalmente. Now this can mean like ‘obviously’, so you could say ‘obviously,naturally, it’s original’.
Student: Naturalmente è originale.
Teacher: Naturalmente è originale. How was normal?
Student: Normale.
Teacher: Good and normally or usually?
Student: Normalmente.
Teacher: Normalmente. Normally it’s digital?
Student: Normalmente è digitale.
Teacher: Very good. Normalmente è digitale. Tell me again how was possible?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Possibile. Good. And impossible, how would impossible be? 
Student: Impossibile.
Teacher: Impossibile. So on the end I really want to hear this bi-leh. Impossibi-leh.
Student: Impossibile.
Teacher: Impossibile. Good. Incredible would be?
Student: Incredibile.
Teacher: Incredibile. Very good. So incredible is just the Latin of unbelievable. The in is like un.Incredibile, incredibile, unbelievable. So if you wanted to say, believable, you could just get rid ofthe in of incredible. How would that be, believable?
Student: Credibleh.
Teacher: Credibile.
Student: Credibile.
Teacher: Or like credible in English, just in English it sounds very formal.
Student: Credibile.
Teacher: And how would you say ‘it’s believable’.
Student: È credibile.
Teacher: È credibile. Good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: ‘I want’ in Italian is ‘voglio’.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Or ‘voy-o’.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Now this is spelt VOGLIO. And the pronunciation will vary quite a lot across Italy and indifferent dialects. The g is pronounced like a y here, it’s soft, no? So the first bit is like voy, and thenwe hear yo or ylo. The l can sound quite swallowed up it really depends on the dialect so whateveryou feel more comfortable with, and just listen out to whoever you’re practicing with, and you’llpick up their accent. So this is voglio ‘I want’ and this is actually connected to the word volunteer inEnglish – when you do something as a volunteer you do it through wanting. So volunteer – voglio.And you may also notice that voglio is two words in English – ‘I want’. And the o on the end isactually what shows us that it’s I – voglio.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Good. How was it is, he is, she is?
Student: È.
Teacher: Good, and ‘he is not’, ‘she is not’? What did we have for not or don’t, and where did it go?
Student: Non è.
Teacher: Good. So we can use this ‘non’ to say ‘I don’t want’, no? We will just put this ‘non’ beforevoglio, so how would that be?
Student: Non è voglio.
Teacher: Think it through, not from memory.
Student: Voglio. Non voglio. Non voglio.
Teacher: Non voglio. The word for it is lo, lo, LO. Lo.
Student: Lo.
Teacher: And if you say, ‘I want it’, this it would come first in Italian. And in Italian you say ‘it I want’, ‘itI want’. So how would that be?
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Good. Lo voglio. If you say ‘I don’t want it’ then don’t is going to come first. So how would thatbe, ‘I don’t want it’.
Student: Voglio…non…
Teacher: So, rather than thinking about it all together, just think about what will come first and then whatcan come next. So take that time to think it through slowly like this.
Student: Non. 
Teacher: And then what’s next?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Good. And then?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Very good. Non lo voglio. Give me again ‘I want’.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Good. I don’t want?
Student: Non voglio.
Teacher: And I don’t want it?
Student: Non lo voglio.
Teacher: Very good. So we can combine this with hundreds of verbs we can pull right out of Latin Englishand convert into Italian. When we have a word ending in -ation, in English, -ation like ATION, thegreat majority of the time it’s a very easy job to find a corresponding verb in Italian. Now, what is averb? The verb is ‘to’, like to cancel, to invite. Voglio, I want, is also a verb, from to want. Soinvitation, for example, is a word we have that ends -ation in English. We can get rid of this -ationand put -are. ARE. So invitation – invitare.
Student: Invitare.
Teacher: And we get to invite. To invite, just like that. And we can do this with hundreds of other verbs aswell. So for example we have in English ‘visitation’. We don’t use it very much, visitation rights ina hospital or a prison. But it exists, and that means we can find the verb ‘to visit’ in Italian. We’rejust going to take off that -ation and we’re going to put -are.
Student: Visitare.
Teacher: Visitare. Very nicely pronounced! Cancel, to cancel is cancellare. So CE or CI in Italian makes/che/ or /chi/ so here we get cancellare – and also there’s two ls in this verb. Cancellare.
Student: Cancellare.
Teacher: Good and we want to pronounce both of those l’s – it might feel like a little bit of a pauseactually cancel-lare.
Student: Cancellare.
Teacher: Very good. So there might be some little changes, no? Invitation – invitare was quite straightforward, but cancel – cancellare, we have two changes there to think about. We have the ce making/che/ which is quite obvious and then the two l’s which is less obvious. Cancellare. How would yousay ‘I want to cancel’. I want is the first part.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Cancellare.
Teacher: Very good. And two l’s, cancellare. 
Student: Cancellare.
Teacher: Very good. I want it?
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Lo voglio. Now, if you want to say ‘I want to cancel it’ you can keep that ‘it’ up front.
Student: Lo voglio cancellare.
Teacher: Very good. Lo voglio cancellare. And if you wanted to say ‘I don’t want to cancel it’. Howwould you say that? ‘I don’t want to cancel it’.
Student: Non lo voglio cancellare.
Teacher: Very good. Non lo voglio cancellare. Good. So we have the non first. How might you say ‘tocelebrate’? We have celebration, so we just take off the -ation and we put…?
Student: Celeberare.
Teacher: Very good that you got the /che/! Very good. Okay no, that’s very good, take it slowly syllable bysyllable.
Student: Celebellare.
Teacher: Syllable by syllable. You don’t want to have a salad you want to be confident, so take your time.
Student: Celebratare.
Teacher: You will get much faster at this, but you really must take your time in the beginning. And also notmake shortcuts, you don’t want to go from celebrate because then you will get something like‘celebratare’ which is not the verb. You want to go from celebration, that’s our root. We start withcelebration, we remove the -ation, we put -are, and we make it sound a little bit more Italian as wego through syllable by syllable. And we see what we end up with.
Student: Celebrare.
Teacher: Celebrare.
Student: Celebrare.
Teacher: So we must go through syllable by syllable slowly. Like I say, this process will get much quickerbut not if you rush, no? Celebrare, celebration. I love that you got the CE, you know, that’s verygood. That was excellent. Of course this is just here so you can say ‘selebrare’ and I can correctyou.
Student: Do you want me to go ahead?
Teacher: No. So, now you could say in Italian, for example, ‘I want to celebrate’.
Student: Voglio celebrare.
Teacher: Voglio celebrare. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: So we’ve seen how we can access hundreds of Italian verbs through identifying Latin words inEnglish that end -ation, and we take off that -ation and we put -are and we get the verb in Italian, orthe ‘to’ form of the verb, so for example invitation becomes invitare – to invite. Donate, to donate –so you don’t want to make a shortcut, we don’t want donatare, that’s not the verb. You want to gofrom donation, so when we have donation and we get rid of the -ation, what are we left with?
Student: Don.
Teacher: And then we add -are.
Student: Donare.
Teacher: Donare. So the same as with celebrate. We have celebration, we get rid of the -ation and we’releft with celebr.
Student: Celebrare.
Teacher: Good. Celebrare, not celebratare. So we want to resist the temptation to take a shortcut goingfrom the verb in English, because that will only sometimes work and often you will end up with anextra t in Italian that you don’t want. So if you want to find for example ‘to coordinate’ youshouldn’t go from coordinate but from coordination.
Student: Coordinare.
Teacher: Very good. Coordinare. To terminate or to finish. We can go from termination and we will get toterminate or to finish.
Student: Terminare.
Teacher: Terminare. Very good. We also have finire meaning to finish, in Italian. Finire. We can also getthe related word final. How would you say final in Italian?
Student: Finale.
Teacher: Finale, good. An -al word like normal, normale, and of course we say in English as well ‘thegrand finale’, no? To separate, we could say ‘to separate’. Separation…?
Student: Seperare.
Teacher: Be very cautious of the uhs that come through from English – sepUHrate. This is not an Italiansound, you know, in Italian our vowels are going to be clear. Sep-ah, so this is an a here no? Sep-/ah/-rah, sep-/ah/-rah, separare.
Student: Separare.
Teacher: So we want to be very clear when we are pronouncing an e, when we are pronouncing an a, andthis is a new skill for a native English speaker. In English you know half of the a’s are pronouncede’s, half of the e’s are pronounced a’s – and on we go, no? So this will be a new skill. To be sure ofwhat vowel actually you’re pronouncing when you pull over these convertible words.
Student: Separare.
Teacher: Good. How would you say ‘I want to donate’? 
Student: Voglio dontare.
Teacher: Are you trying to find it from memory? Are you trying to remember the word we found before orare you finding it again? There’s no reason to use your memory, you just go ‘oh how do I find’…okay, donation and find it again.
Student: Dontare.
Teacher: Slowly though.
Student: Donare. Donare.
Teacher: Good. So this is just little shortcuts, little stresses that we want to get it out quickly and we wantto get it right, and these are never tests, these sentences, these are thinking exercises which give usthe opportunity to think it through. And it’s that thinking through that’s going to install the Italianrather than the sentences themselves, no? So we really want to take our time, and we might have toplay a little bit even before we realise how it will sound without the -ation but you will get better atthis really quickly. Donation – don – donare. Good, so ‘I want to donate’?
Student: Voglio donare.
Teacher: Voglio donare. To use, you can say ‘to utilise’, no? We have utilisation, so we could have foundthat, this would be utilizzare, but also in Italian you have usare. To use, usare.
Student: Usare.
Teacher: And that’s maybe more common. So how would you say ‘I want to use it’? So ‘it I want to use’?
Student: Lo voglio usare.
Teacher: Good. Lo voglio usare. Very good. What was to finish?
Student: Finire.
Teacher: Finire, or also we can find from ‘termination’. If we don’t remember finire we can findtermination, take off the -ation and we would get…?
Student: Terminare.
Teacher: Very good. Terminare. I want to finish.
Student: Voglio terminare.
Teacher: Volgio terminare, voglio finire. I want to finish it?
Student: Lo voglio terminare.
Teacher: Good and I don’t want to finish it?
Student: Non lo voglio terminare.
Teacher: Very good, non lo voglio terminare. So we get hundreds of sentences in Italian now, hundredsjust with ‘voglio’ or ‘non voglio’ or ‘lo voglio’ or ‘non lo voglio’, with one of these hundreds ofverbs that we could find from English, from Latin English, and we won’t realise just how manythey are until we start trying to speak and realising that we can pull in all of these words. Howwould you say ‘I don’t want to imagine’? Let’s begin with I don’t want.
Student: Non voglio. 
Teacher: Good. To imagine. Now, imagine has two m’s in Italian, and you’ll pronounce those both.
Student: Immaginitare.
Teacher: Find it slowly, don’t guess it.
Student: Immaginatare.
Teacher: Okay, so, go to imagination and first tell me how it will sound without the -ation.
Student: Imagine. Immaginare.
Teacher: Good, and two m’s. Immaginare.
Student: Immaginare.
Teacher: Very good. I don’t want to imagine?
Student: Non voglio immaginare.
Teacher: Non voglio immaginare. I love you, in Italian, in a friendly way or a romantic way, is ti vogliobene, ti voglio bene. Now this literally means ‘I want you well’. So, ti is you. Ti voglio – I wantyou – and then bene, well. We have this in English as well – benefit, the first bit of benefit is thesame as this ‘bene’ in Italian. Of course benefit has to do with wellness, no? You can see theconnection. So for you we have ‘ti’, ‘ti’, spelled TI, TI, for you. So if you wanted to say forexample, ‘I want to visit you’. ‘You I want to visit’.
Student: Ti voglio visitare.
Teacher: Good. Ti voglio visitare. I want to invite you?
Student: Ti voglio…ti voglio invitare.
Teacher: Ti voglio invitare. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: We’ve seen two little words like lo and ti that we’ve been putting before the verb in Italian. Forexample we were saying ‘it I want’ rather than ‘I want it’. How was that, ‘I want it’ or ‘it I want’?
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Lo voglio, good. And we could also say ‘I love you’, ‘I want you well’. Do you remember howthat was?
Student: Te voglio bene.
Teacher: Ti. Ti voglio bene.
Student: Ti voglio bene.
Teacher: So we’ve been putting this before the verb but when we have a ‘to verb’, a verb in it’s ‘to’ formso that’s to invite, to visit, to cancel, we can also put it on the end. Now, when we do that, when weput ‘lo’ or ‘ti’ or some other words we will see on the end of our ‘to’ form, our ‘to verb’, to cancel,cancellare, that last e on the end, we don’t need it anymore, no? We like to end on a vowel inItalian, we said, but the lo or the ti, for example, already does. So we’ll have cancellarlo. And thelo is hooked on, it’s written like one word. Cancellarlo.
Student: Cancellarlo.
Teacher: So if we say ‘I want to cancel it’, we have the option of where to put that ‘lo’. We can put it at thebeginning, as we were doing, so tell me that first. ‘I want to cancel it’ or ‘it I want to cancel’.
Student: Lo voglio cancellare.
Teacher: So we have two l’s on cancellare. Lo voglio cancellare. Very good. But you could also hook itonto the end of cancellare. And if you do that, you don’t need that e anymore, no? So how wouldthat sound having it on the end. I want to cancel it?
Student: Voglio cancellarlo.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio cancellarlo. Very good. We have ‘preparation’ which also means we can getthe verb ‘to prepare’ in Italian.
Student: Prepara…preperare.
Teacher: Preparare. So we have an a in there actually rather than an e. Pre-pah-rah-reh.
Student: Preparare.
Teacher: To say ‘I want to get ready’, you could say ‘I want to prepare myself’. Now, the word for myselfis the same as the word for me, and the word for me is the same as in English: me.
Student: Me.
Teacher: But how is that spelled in Italian?
Student: With an i. 
Teacher: Good, because it’s an /ee/ sound like ink, so it’s spelled with an i. Very good. Mi. So you couldsay ‘I want to prepare myself’ and that would mean ‘I want to get ready’. First give it to me with themi up front.
Student: Mi voglio preperare. There’s a lot of r’s.
Teacher: So take it syllable by syllable. Pre-pah-rah-reh. Don’t rush it and think ‘is it an e or an a here’?So actually we only have an e at the beginning which is the e of pre, no? Like pre-paid. Preh.
Student: Preh.
Teacher: And then pah-rah-reh.
Student: Preparare.
Teacher: Much better. So I want to prepare myself, with the mi, the myself, up front?
Student: Mi voglio preperare.
Teacher: Slowly. Because if you don’t do it slowly then the things we just thought about they get lost.
Student: Mi voglio preparare.
Teacher: Mi voglio preparare. So, that would mean ‘I want to get ready’ and we could have the mi on theend as well. It doesn’t make any difference to the meaning but we have that option. And how wouldit sound then with the mi on the end?
Student: Voglio prepararmi.
Teacher: Good. Very good. We have to lose that e on the end, we don’t need it anymore, because mi endswith a vowel. Voglio prepararmi. Good. In the same way, if you were to say ‘I don’t want toconform’ in Italian you would say ‘I don’t want to conform myself’. Conformation, so we haveconform, how would you say ‘to conform’?
Student: Conformare.
Teacher: Conformare. Good, and this is an interesting word. ‘Con’ actually means ‘with’, ‘con’ means‘with’, and ‘form’, we know what this means. So ‘with-form’, to conform is ‘with-form’.Conformare. So ‘I don’t want to conform’ or ‘I don’t want to conform myself’. Give it to me firstwith the mi up front.
Student: Non mi voglio conformare.
Teacher: Very good. You forgot it, but it didn’t matter because you knew how to find it, no?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Conformation, conformare. Good. Non mi voglio conformare. And you could also put it at theend, how would that be?
Student: Non voglio conformarmi.
Teacher: Non voglio conformarmi. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: So, these small words mi, ti, lo, we can have them after the to form, no? to conform, to finish, tocancel or before the verb that’s not a to form anymore like voglio it’s I want, it’s not to want. So thatmeans in some situations we have an option but in other situations we have no option, like if youonly have ‘I want’ it’s not ‘to want’ so you must have the ‘it’ before. So how would you say ‘I wantit’?
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Very good. Lo voglio. I don’t want it?
Student: Non lo voglio.
Teacher: Good. So there we have no option, we have no choice, we only have one verb, it’s not a to verb,it’s not to want, it’s I want so that lo comes before. You might also only have a to verb. For exampleif you say something like ‘it is not possible to cancel it’, in that part ‘to cancel it’, we only have tocancel. So there again we have no choice, we must put the lo there on the end. So how would yousay that, it’s not possible to cancel it? Let’s begin with it’s not possible.
Student: Non è posibile.
Teacher: With two s’s – possibile. To cancel it?
Student: Cancellarelo, cancellarlo.
Teacher: Good. Non è possibile cancellarlo.
Student: Non è possibile cancellarlo.
Teacher: But it’s important to take time with this double consonants, like possibile and cancellare andthey will also give you more time to think about what’s coming next, no? So it feels like a pause, weare actually pronouncing both of these s’s. Possibile. And again, cancel-lar, cancellarlo.
Student: Cancellarlo.
Teacher: Much better. So words like lo, ti, mi, sometimes we won’t have a choice on where we’d putthem, sometimes we will. But the rule about where they go is on the end of the to verb, no? Toinvite, to visit or before the verb that’s not in the to form like I want. So if you wanted to say I wantto invite you – do you have a choice there on where to put the you?
Student: No. it has to be in the front.
Teacher: Let’s try it. Let’s put it in the front first. So, ‘you I want to invite’.
Student: Ti voglio invitare.
Teacher: Ti voglio invitare. And do you think there’s anywhere else there it could go that ti?
Student: Voglio invitarti, invitarti.
Teacher: Good. Voglio invitarti. Good. Voglio invitarti, ti voglio invitare. Let’s access some more verbsfrom Latin English. So we have for example the verb creation which means we can also find theverb to create in Italian.
Student: Crietare 
Teacher: So that’s a bit of a shortcut, no? you’re going from create and you’re putting -are. But you wannago from creation, remove the -ation and then put your -are. And do it slowly, so you don’t put extrasounds, you know?
Student: Crieare. Creare. Creare.
Teacher: Good. Creare. Very good. So we think slowly, syllable by syllable. Complication? So tocomplicate?
Student: Compliare
Teacher: A bit slower.
Student: Compleare
Teacher: Any though process, you want to divide it into like the smallest thoughts possible, no? So we’rereally in control of it.
Student: Comple.
Teacher: So, the first bit is, what is it without the -ation, which is complic actually.
Student: Complic.
Teacher: It’s easy to lose the c because it’s like part of the next syllable, no? Complic-ation but if we justget rid of the -ation we still have that c, complic. We will realize that only if we do it slowly. Andthen to that we add a -are.
Student: Complicare.
Teacher: Complicare. And then we have to complicate, complicare. And complicare is an interestingword actually. I mentioned before that con means with as in ‘to conform’ – this can be con or com,so in complicare we have an m there. Complicare actually means ‘with folding’ which isinteresting, no? When something gets complicated it’s like…
Student: With holding?
Teacher: Folding.
Student: With folding.
Teacher: With folding. That’s what it means to fold actually is piegare, piegare. And if you think that’sstrange, the word for simplemindedness or naivity in German is Einfalt which means one fold, onefold. So you know there is a shared mentality there somehow about folding and complicatedness orsimpleness. So whenever you see a con or a com, try to work out what’s going on there behind thescenes, where is the meaning coming from. So you can go picking apart Italian words and asknative speakers if they can relate it to something and of course the native speakers never think abouttheir language in this way so they might enjoy doing it with you. 

Italian Track - Level: Beginner

Teacher: To demonstrate, to demonstrate in Italian is dimostrare, dimostrare.
Student: Dimostrare.
Teacher: And it’s spelled DIMOSTRARE. So actually we have a couple of changes there fromdemonstrate, the n goes and the de of demonstrate becomes di in Italian. So we get dimostrare, todemonstrate.
Student: Dimostrare.
Teacher: This actually means something like from monster. Monster was a deformed animal actuallywhich was considered like an omen, demonstrating something like a message or a sign from thegods, so you know maybe you see an animal with one horn too many and you will understand thatmonster as a sign from the gods. So demonstrate or dimostrare means from monster. Todemonstrate. This di we will find around and it means of or from. If we get rid of it we left withmostrare which means just to show.
Student: Mostrare.
Teacher: Mostrare. So this is like literally to monster, no? but it means to show, mostrare.
Student: Mostrare.
Teacher: The monster is il mostro, il mostro.
Student: Il mostro.
Teacher: So that’s the monster. So you can see all of that connected. How would you say I want to showyou? I want to show you.
Student: Voglio mostra-, voglio mostrarti.
Teacher: Good. So we didn’t put it up front so we had to hook it on the end there and lose the e ofmostrare. Volgio mostrarti. But we could have also had it upfront. Ti volgio mostrare. The capital,the capital like the capital city is la and how would capital be?
Student: Capitale.
Teacher: Good. La capitale. How would you say I want to show you the capital?
Student: Voglio mostrare-, mostrarti la capitale.
Teacher: Good. Voglio mostrati la capitale. Or ti voglio mostrare la capitale. So we have this same rootof monster in monitor, admonish, also money. Money, the moneymonster, is a showing of value, it’snot real value well especially in our monetary system as well money doesn’t have any real value,it’s a show of money so that mon of money is actually monster or showing. Actually the language ofthe economy is quite telling. We have money monster, no? Mortgage, is a death pact. We havemortal, no? How would mortal be in Italian?
Student: Mortale. 
Teacher: Mortale. Exactly. So mortgage and we have that t that we don’t pronounce in mortgage. Thatactually means death pact. Then we have advertisement. Advertisement actually means a warning.To warn in Italian is avvertire. Two v’s – avvertire.
Student: Avvertire.
Teacher: Good. We have inadvertently in English as well where we can see that meaning of warninadvertently. so advertisement is a warning. and we have avvertire, avvertire to warn in Italian.How would you say I want to warn you?
Student: Ti voglio avvertere.
Teacher: Ti voglio avvertire. Or voglio avvertirti. And then we have the word debt, no? Which is spelledDEBT in English. And the word devo in Italian. So that b becomes a v in Italian. Devo means I oweor I have to DEVO. devo. I have to or I owe.
Student: Devo.
Teacher: So that related to debt, no? is I have to, I must, it’s obligation. So the meaning of debt is justobligation. So devo ‘I owe’ or also ‘I have to’ in Italian. So how would you say I have to warn you?
Student: Ti devo avvertire.
Teacher: Good. Ti devo avvertire. So money is a monster, mortgage is a death pact and advert is awarning. And debt is what you get when you buy the thing the warning was about. And that debt isobligation. Devo. I owe or I must, I have to. How would you say ‘I have to show you the capital’, ‘Ihave to show you the capital’? So we’ll break it up and think piece by piece. I have to, or I must or Iowe.
Student: Devo.
Teacher: To show you
Student: Mostra – mostrarti.
Teacher: Good. The capital.
Student: La capitale.
Teacher: Devo mostrarti la capitale. I must cooperate?
Student: Devo cooperare.
Teacher: Devo cooperare. I must inform myself. This just means I must get info I have to find out, youknow? I must inform myself or inform me.
Student: Devo informarmi.
Teacher: Devo informarmi. Good. I must visit you.
Student: Devo visitarti.
Teacher: Very good. Devo visitarti.
Student: Devo visitarti.Good. Or ti devo visitare. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So how was I want?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. Good. And I owe or I must which was related to debt.
Student: Devo.
Teacher: Devo.
Student: Devo.
Teacher: So the -o is showing us that it’s I, no? I want voglio, I must devo. So the -o is what’s showing usthat it’s I but we have a word for I which we can use. And this is io, io. And it can sound a little bitmore like /yo/, /yo/ especially when it’s pronounced in a sentence. A little bit like the English a, no?If somebody says how would you say this word as in ‘a house’ you know and you pronounce itslowly, you will say ‘a house’. But then more fluently ‘a house’, ‘a house’. So this is the situationwith io, io when stands alone but maybe a little more like /yo/ when hear it in a sentence.
Student: Io.
Teacher: And this is spelled IO. so you can use this for emphasis you know if you want to say like I wantyou know who wants? I do. I want.
Student: Io voglio.
Teacher: Io voglio. I want it. We will have the I first.
Student: Io lo voglio.
Teacher: Good. I don’t want it.
Student: Io non voglio.
Teacher: And the it?
Student: Io non lo voglio.
Teacher: Good. But if you say it slowly and broken like this, you would pronounce more io. Io non lovoglio. Or more fluently, io (/yo/) non lo voglio. And that io is kind of extra like we say we don’tneed it, non lo voglio. And because of that it’s really flexible, so you could say io non lo voglio ornon lo voglio io, which is even more emphatic so it sounds like I’m the one that doesn’t want it.How was possible, possible?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Very good. Possibile.
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Now I can is posso, posso, also with two s’s.
Student: Posso. 
Teacher: So I can or I am able, no? Your ability is your possibility. So we can see that connection,possibile, posso, I can. And again the -o showing that it’s I. how would you say I can, emphasisingI?
Student: Io posso.
Teacher: Io posso. Very good there with the double s. how would you say I am able to cancel it? I am ableto cancel it, I can cancel it.
Student: Posso cancellare.
Teacher: Good. And the it?
Student: Posso lo cancellare.
Teacher: That’s the only place where you can’t put it. You can have it on the end there or you can have itbefore the verb that is not in it’s to form, no?
Student: Lo posso...
Teacher: Good. Lo posso cancellare. Or?
Student: Posso cancellarelo – cancellarlo.
Teacher: Good. Posso cancellarlo. And if you don’t want to worry it of course you can just have itupfront. Lo posso cancellare. How would you say I can’t cancel it? I am not able to cancel it.
Student: Non posso cancellare lo.
Teacher: So if you will put it on the end we don’t need the e anymore of cancellare. And of coursecancellarlo is also written like one word. But if you don’t want to worry about doing that you canjust put it upfront.
Student: Non lo posso cancellare.
Teacher: Much easier, no?
Student: Yeah.
Teacher: Non lo posso cancellare. The word for them is li.
Student: Li.
Teacher: So we have lo for it and li for them. How would you say, ‘I can cancel them’, ‘I’m able to cancelthem’?
Student: Le posso cancellare.
Teacher: So it’s li, LI. Li posso cancellare. Or posso cancellarli. The word for today in Italian, today isoggi.
Student: Oggi.
Teacher: That’s OGGI. Oggi.
Student: Oggi.
Teacher: So you see these double consonants are a big deal in Italian. They’re a big feature of Italian. Wemust get used to stopping on them, no? Taking our time to pronounce both, og-gi which feels and sounds like a pause, no? og-gi. And that also gives us time to think, especially when we’re buildingour sentences. Oggi. Today. So how would you say ‘I can’t cancel them today’, ‘I can’t cancel themtoday’?
Student: Non posso cancellare... cancellarle... cancellarli
Teacher: Good. Today.
Student: Oggi.
Teacher: Very good. Non posso cancellarli oggi. How was I have to, I must or I owe?
Student: Devo.
Teacher: Very good. Devo. To organise, to organise. So we can go from organisation and we getorganizzare. So here we have two z’s in Italian. Organizzare. To organise.
Student: Organizzare.
Teacher: Very good. and of course the word organ is related to organised, no? Your organs are organised.They have to be, so that’s connected. Organ, organised. To organise, organizzare. So how wouldyou say ‘I have to organise it’, ‘I have to organise it’?
Student: Devo organizzare lo, organ… lo devo organizzare.
Teacher: Exactly if you have a problem to put that thing on the end then lo devo organizzare. How wouldyou say ‘I have to organise them’?
Student: Li devo organizzare.
Teacher: Li devo organizzare. So it’s not obvious in English because it doesn’t look anything like thembut them is the plural, the plural of it. Two its is them. Two its are them, no? So lo is it and the pluralof that is li. So we can make the plural in Italian with this too. For example we had the monster, no?Monster was mostro, no like in demonstrate. We had dimostrare, to demonstrate and mostrare toshow and il mostro was the monster. If you wanted to say monsters you can do exactly what youdid between lo and li. Mostro would become?
Student: Mostri.
Teacher: Mostri. Monsters, no? so il mostro, il mostro, the monster becomes i mostri. So the i the /ee/sound gives us the plural for the word for the, that also changes – il mostro, i mostri, and also theending, no? Mostro, mostri. The word for dog is cane, cane.
Student: Cane.
Teacher: Can you relate it to something does it sound like something in English that has to do with dogs?
Student: Canine?
Teacher: Yes. Canine, canine, cane. And how would dogs be?
Student: Cani.
Teacher: Cani. Dogs. So you get il cane the dog and i cani the dogs. The concert, the concert is, well youcan imagine it might be the same in Italian because it has con- at the beginning which means withand if you had to make it sound more Italian, what would you try to do to the word concert? 
Student: Concerto?
Teacher: Good. And also the ce what sound does it make?
Student: Concerto.
Teacher: Concerto.
Student: Concerto.
Teacher: So il concerto is the concert and concerts would be?
Student: Concerti.
Teacher: Concerti. Or the concerts i concerti. So the word for the also changes, no? il concerto – iconcerti. So just like between lo and li, it and them, we get the plural by changing that last vowel toan i. To see, to see in Italian is vedere, vedere.
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Like video, video is a Latin word, no? it’s sharing its root there with vedere, to see. That’sVEDERE. Vedere.
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: How would you say I want to see it?
Student: Lo, lo voglio vedere.
Teacher: Good. Lo voglio vedere. And I want to see them?
Student: Li voglio vedere.
Teacher: Li voglio vedere. How would you say I want to see the concert? I want to see the concert.
Student: Voglio vedere il concerto.
Teacher: Voglio vedere il concerto. And how would you say i want to see ‘the concerts’, ‘the concerts’?
Student: Voglio vedere il concerti.
Teacher: And il also changes in the plural.
Student: I.
Teacher: I. So again just the plural sound.
Student: I concerti.
Teacher: Good. Voglio vedere i concerti. To confirm, to confirm, like confirmation, no? In Italian isconfermare. Now this is spelled with an ‘i’ in English confirm, but in Italian it becomes an e whichconsequently makes it sound more like the English, no? Confermare.
Student: Confermare.
Teacher: So that’s to confirm which literally means with firm, no? when you confirm you make somethingfirm. With firm. Confermare. What was I can?
Student: Poss….
Teacher: That’s it. Now you, you only need to think of the I bit now. What is I on the verbs? 
Student: O. Poss... posso.
Teacher: Posso. I can’t confirm it today, I can’t confirm it today.
Student: Non posso confermar, non lo posso confermare oggi.
Teacher: Non lo posso confermare oggi. To this we can also connect fermare, fermare which means tostop something, no? Like to bring to a stop, to firm, no? Fermare. And also firmare which meansto sign which has again the meaning of make firm, no? when you sign something, firmare. So onewith the e, fermare to stop something. And firmare with an i, to sign. How would you say ‘I can’tsign it today’?
Student: Non posso firmar, firmare, firmarlo oggi.
Teacher: Very good. Non posso firmarlo oggi. Or non lo posso firmare oggi. So voglio, devo, possothey are very useful because we can add verbs onto them, no? all to verbs, like to cancel, to see, tosign. And this gives us thousands of sentences just with these three words, the negative and all ofthose convertible words that we are pulling over from Latin English. How would you sayconvertible?
Student: Convertibile.
Teacher: Convertibile. Good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So we continue the audios with Meera who has done the first ten audios online, and we’recontinuing together from number 11. Hello, welcome Meera.
Student: Hello.
Teacher: How do you think you would say to collaborate in Italian? So we have ‘collaboration’ in English,so what might ‘to collaborate’ be in Italian?
Student: Collaborare.Good, and here we have two ls and you will pronounce them both in Italian.
Student: Collaborare.
Teacher: Good, collaborare. Good. And this ‘col’ is still the ‘con’ that we mentioned, it’s still ‘with’. Justthe n has been assimilated to that next letter which is what actually has given us two ls. We don’tpronounce them in English, but we do in Italian. Collaborare. How would you say ‘I want tocollaborate’?
Student: Voglio collaborare.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio collaborare. If we get rid of the ‘con’, this word that means ‘with’ or ‘col’ inthis case, as we said the n assimilated to the next letter, we get ‘lavorare’. And here we have a v,‘lavorare’. And this means ‘to work’.
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: B and v are such close sounds. For example, in Spanish the v letter mostly gives us a b sound andin Greek the letter that looks like a b gives us a v, so there’s a little crossover there between thesevery close sounds. ‘Collaborare’, with a b, ‘to collaborate’ or to ‘with-work’, and then ‘lavorare’,just ‘to work’.
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: How would you say ‘I want to work’?
Student: Voglio lavorare.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio lavorare. And of course this is like ‘labour’, that we have in English andagain we have that b to v shift. What was the word for ‘today’?
Student: Oggi.
Teacher: Oggi, very well done on the pronunciation of the two g’s there, ‘oggi’. How would you say ‘Idon’t want to work today’, or maybe more common in Italian, ‘today I don’t want to work’.
Student: Oggi non voglio lavorare.
Teacher: Very good. Oggi non voglio lavorare. What was ‘I have to’, ‘I must’ or literally ‘I owe’?
Student: Devo. 
Teacher: Devo. Good. And again we have another b to v shift, no? In English we have the letter b in theword debt, DEBT, and in Italian, v. Devo, I owe, related of course with debt. So ‘I have to worktoday’ is just ‘I owe to work today’. How would that be?
Student: Oggi devo lavorare.
Teacher: Very good. Oggi devo lavorare. Oggi devo lavorare. So ‘voglio’, ‘devo’ – we have -o on theend and we mentioned how this -o is what gives us ‘I’, that’s what shows that it’s ‘I’ – ‘I want’, ‘Imust’. So if we want to get ‘I’m working’ or ‘I work’ from ‘to work’ we can use this -o, but first wemust remove the ending which shows us that it’s ‘to work’, and that’s -are. So we get rid of -arefrom ‘lavorare’ and we put out o, and that’s how we move between ‘to work’ and ‘I work’ or ‘I’mworking’. How would that sound?
Student: Lavo…lavoro.
Teacher: Lavoro. Good. And the o doesn’t take the accent, no? The ending doesn’t take the accent.‘Lavoro’, so we go from ‘lavorare’, we get rid of this -are and we put o, and we move between ‘towork’ and ‘I work’. So again, ‘I work’ or ‘I’m working’.
Student: Lavoro.
Teacher: Lavoro. I’m working today.
Student: Oggi lavoro.
Teacher: Good, ‘oggi lavoro’. Lavoro oggi. And it’s important not to have the accent on the ending. Ifyou were to say lavor-o, that would mean ‘he’ or ‘she worked’ in the past, and he or she not I. Wewill come back to this but for now it’s just very important not to accent that ending, we want theaccent before – lavoro.
Student: Lavoro.
Teacher: How would you say ‘I’m not working today’?
Student: Oggi non lavoro.
Teacher: Oggi non lavoro. Good. The word ‘to see’ is vedere, vedere.
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Which was related to ‘video’. How would you say ‘I see’? So you will do the same, you willremove the ending of the verb that shows that it’s ‘to see’. So if ‘-are’ showed us that it’s ‘to work’in ‘lavorare’, what is showing us that it’s ‘to see’ in ‘vedere’?
Student: -Ere.
Teacher: -Ere, good, so we get rid of that, we put our o, and that gives us ‘I see’ or ‘I’m seeing’.
Student: Vedo.
Teacher: Vedo. ‘I see you’, ‘you I see’.
Student: Ti vedo.
Teacher: Ti vedo. I don’t see you.
Student: Non ti vedo. 
Teacher: Non ti vedo. So this might be used rather than ‘I can’t see you’, no? In English we use ‘can’t’quite a lot, but if you were looking for somebody in a park and you’re on the phone for example,and you wanted to say ‘I can’t see you’, in Italian you would just say ‘I don’t see you’. ‘I can’t seeyou’ would refer to some circumstance or individual that doesn’t allow it. And we learned thatword, we got ‘I can’ from ‘possible’. What was ‘possible’?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Possibile. And ‘I can’?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso, good. So how would you say ‘I can’t see you’?
Student: Non posso vederti.
Teacher: Very good, ‘non posso vederti’, or ‘non ti posso vedere’. So if we were to use ‘posso’ thiswould be something like, you know, ‘I can’t see you because of the circumstances’ or ‘I’m notallowed, my parents don’t let me’, ‘I have to work’, something like this. How would you say that, ‘Ican’t see you, I have to work’?
Student: Non ti posso vedere, devo lavorare.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. ‘Non posso vederti’, ‘non ti posso vedere, devo lavorare’. I can’t seeyou today, I have to work. Today I can’t see you, I have to work.
Student: Oggi non posso vederti, devo lavorare.
Teacher: Very good. Oggi non posso vederti, devo lavorare. So tell me again what was ‘possible’?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Possibile. Words ending -ity, ITY like possibility, we can also make Italian. All we have to do isreplace this -ity with -ità, -ità ITA. And we’re also accenting that a on the end, -ità. So if we want toget ‘possibility’, you will just replace that -ity with -ità and accent the end, how might that sound?
Student: Possibilità.
Teacher: Good but we want to hang around a little bit on the s, no? Possibilità.
Student: Possibilità.
Teacher: Good, we have two s’s there so we hang around on them, possibilità. So we had ‘probable’,which was?
Student: Probable. Probabile.
Teacher: Probabile, probabile. And ‘probability’?
Student: Probabilità.
Teacher: Very good. Probabilità. ‘Personality’ would be?
Student: Personalità.
Teacher: Personalità, good. So this is the rule, we have a rule for converting -ity to -ità. But then youmight come across another word that we don’t have a rule for, but maybe you can see that it’srelated to a word that we do have a rule for, so for example, ‘person’. We don’t know how to make ‘person’ in Italian, but we know how to make ‘personality’ Italian. So this means that we canassume ‘person’ is also going to be the same or very similar in Italian. So then we just have to playa little bit to try and find it. So what might you do to make ‘person’ sound a bit a more Italian?
Student: Persona.
Teacher: Persona, yes! So maybe you put an e, maybe you put an o, maybe you put an a. You know it’sgoing to end with a vowel in Italian. You can run through the possibilities in your mind, and the onethat you’ve heard before is just going to sound better, so if you’re not sure you can go: ‘persono,persone, persona’ and maybe one jumps out at you. ‘Persona’, ‘person’. How would you say‘generosity’?
Student: Generosità.
Teacher: And if you wanted to say ‘generous’, now again we don’t have a rule for this, but as you got‘generosità’ from ‘generosity’, you could guess that ‘generous’ would be very similar and you canstart playing.
Student: Generoso.
Teacher: Generoso. Good. Also depending on the dialect of Italian this single s between vowels mightsound more like an s or more like a z. ‘Generoso’, ‘generozo’. ‘Probable’ actually means somethinglike ‘testable’, ‘triable’. Probable. So we can also get the verb ‘to try’ or ‘to try out’ from ‘probable’.This verb is ‘provare’.
Student: Provare.
Teacher: And this is with a v. So again we have that strange change between b and v, no? We have a b in‘probable’, ‘probabile’, and then in the verb ‘to try’ we have a v. Provare. So how would you say‘I’m trying’, ‘I’m trying out’ from ‘provare’.
Student: Provo.
Teacher: ‘Provo’, good. I’m trying out LanguageTransfer.
Student: Provo LanguageTransfer.
Teacher: Good, provo LanguageTransfer. You could also say the word for ‘I’ if you wanted to beemphatic, what was that?
Student: Io.
Teacher: Yeah.
Student: Io provo LanguageTransfer.
Teacher: Good, ‘io provo LanguageTransfer’. The word for ‘I’, ‘io’, you know when you reallyemphasise it, it’s much more like ‘ee-oh’, but when you say it quickly it might sound like /yo/. Ioprovo LanguageTransfer. So you might hear both there, ‘ee-oh provo LanguageTransfer’, ‘yoprovo LanguageTransfer’. How would you say I’m trying it?
Student: Lo provo.
Teacher: Very good, lo provo. I’m not trying it?
Student: Non lo provo. 
Teacher: Non lo provo. Io non lo provo. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So how was ‘probable’ in Italian?
Student: Probabile.
Teacher: And ‘probability’?
Student: Probabilità.
Teacher: Good. How would you say ‘opportunity’?
Student: Opportunità.
Teacher: Good, and I think you tried to pronounce, I think you did pronounce the double p there, no?
Student: Opportunità.
Teacher: So we have a double p there, even though that doesn’t make a lot of difference to us in English,it’s important for Italian. Opportunità. The word for ‘city’ doesn’t sound like the same word at allbut it is: città, città.
Student: Città.
Teacher: So here we have CITTA. So it’s a slight irregularity for our rule, no, which is expected beingsuch a small word we have two t’s. And we know that CE and CI give us the /ch/ sound, so city,CITTA, città.
Student: Città.
Teacher: We said that nouns are words that we can put ‘the’ or ‘a’ in front of. Nouns ending -a arefeminine and may take ‘la’ for ‘the’. So ‘the city’ is?
Student: La città.
Teacher: La città. The personality?
Student: La personalità.
Teacher: La personalità. The person?
Student: La persona.
Teacher: La persona. The speciality?
Student: La specialità.
Teacher: Good! Very well done. C-i giving us ‘ch’ again like in città, ‘city’ so la specialità. What was ‘Imust’?
Student: Devo.
Teacher: Devo, and ‘you must’?
Student: Devi.
Teacher: Devi, good. ‘You must try LanguageTransfer’, what was ‘to try’, related to ‘probable’ whichactually means ‘triable’, ‘try-outable’? 
Student: Provare.
Teacher: Provare. So ‘you must try LanguageTransfer’.
Student: Devi provare LanguageTransfer.
Teacher: Good, devi provare LanguageTransfer. I don’t usually put these sentences in every course bythe way. How would you say ‘you must try it’?
Student: Devi provarlo.
Teacher: ‘Devi provarlo’, good. Or where else could you put the ‘lo’?
Student: Lo devi provare.
Teacher: Very good. Lo devi provare. So we have /ee/, an i, an /ee/ sound for ‘you’ like in ‘devi’. Giveme again ‘to try’.
Student: Provare.
Teacher: Provare. And ‘I try’?
Student: Provo.
Teacher: Provo. So we got rid of our -are which shows us that it’s ‘to try’, we get rid of that when it’s not‘to try’ any more, and we put the -o to show that it’s ‘I try’ and also we make an effort not to accentthat o, no? Provo rather than prov-o. So you would do the same to get ‘you try’, the sound for ‘you’as we see in ‘devi’ is /ee/, an i, an /ee/ sound. So how would you say ‘you try’?
Student: Provi.
Teacher: Provi, good. ‘Are you trying the speciality’, ‘are you trying out the speciality’, ‘are you givingthe speciality a try’? How would that be?
Student: Provi la specialità?
Teacher: Very good. Provi la specialità? Tomorrow is domani, domani.
Student: Domani.
Teacher: DOMANI. Domani. Tomorrow.
Student: Domani.
Teacher: How would you say ‘you must see the city tomorrow’? So this is ‘you owe to see the citytomorrow’. Let’s start with the beginning ‘you owe’, ‘you must’.
Student: Devi vedere la città domani.
Teacher: Very good. Devi vedere la città domani. Very good. Are you seeing the city tomorrow? So thefirst bit is ‘are you seeing’, that’s just ‘do you see’.
Student: Vedi la città domani?
Teacher: Good. Vedi la città domani? Are you seeing it tomorrow? Now when you say ‘it’ referring the tothe city, referring to something feminine rather than lo you will use la, like in la città. So, ‘are youseeing it’, and we mean a feminine it, ‘la’. Are you seeing it tomorrow?
Student: La vedi domani? 
Teacher: Good. La vedi domani? Good, so this refers to the city. So we’ve seen that the present can beused to refer to the future if there’s some context, no? This context might just be the situation or inthe language you know with a word like ‘tomorrow’, ‘domani’. Or even ‘oggi’, no? ‘Oggi’, ‘today’can be future if we’re referring to part of the day that hasn’t happened. The word ‘late’ in Italian is‘tardi’, ‘tardi’. TARDI. Tardi.
Student: Tardi.
Teacher: And you know you can also hear that English slang, no? You can say, ‘I’m arriving today a bittardy’ now that’s of course the same word, that’s just from Latin. ‘Tardi’, ‘late’. How would yousay, ‘it is late’?
Student: Lo è tardi, or è tardi.
Teacher: Yeah, just è, no? Because è by itself means ‘it is’, ‘she is’, ‘he is’. We don’t need ‘lo’. È tardi.
Student: È tardi.
Teacher: So this is the open è, no, that is pronounced more like /ɛ/ rather than /eh/ no? Nothing to stressabout now, more about listening to Italians and just kind of picking it up as you go along. È tardi.Later, later in Italian is ‘more late’. The word for ‘more’ is ‘più’. PIU, più.
Student: Più.
Teacher: So how would you say ‘later’, ‘more late’?
Student: Più tardi.
Teacher: Più tardi. How would you say ‘it is later’?
Student: È più tardi.
Teacher: È più tardi. I see it later. I see it later.
Student: Lo vedo più tardi.
Teacher: Lo vedo più tardi. And what if you meant ‘the city’, ‘I will see the city later’, but you’re stillgoing to say ‘it’.
Student: La vedo più tardi.
Teacher: Very good. La vedo più tardi. I’ll try it later.
Student: Lo provo più tardi.
Teacher: Very good. Lo provo più tardi. What was ‘to work’?
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: Lavorare. I’m working later.
Student: Lavoro più tardi.
Teacher: Lavoro più tardi. Are you working later?
Student: Lavori più tardi?
Teacher: Lavori più tardi?
Student: Lavori più tardi? 
Teacher: Good. Are you working tomorrow?
Student: Lavori domani?
Teacher: Lavori domani? Aren’t you working tomorrow?
Student: Non lavori domani?
Teacher: Non lavori domani? ‘To do’ or ‘to make’ in Italian is ‘fare’.
Student: Fare.
Teacher: FARE. Fare.
Student: Fare.
Teacher: So what is the bit there that shows us it’s ‘to make’.
Student: -Are.
Teacher: -Are. ARE. How would you say ‘I want to do it later’.
Student: Lo voglio fare più tardi.
Teacher: Lo voglio fare più tardi. Very good. You must do it later. ‘You must’, ‘you owe’, ‘to do it later’.
Student: Lo devi fare più tardi.
Teacher: Lo devi fare più tardi. Very well done. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was to work again?
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: Lavorare. ‘Are you working later?’
Student: Lavori più tardi?Good. Lavori più tardi. ‘Aren’t you working later?’
Student: Non lavori più tardi?
Teacher: Non lavorie più tardi. The word for why, is perché, perché.
Student: Perché.
Teacher: So how would you say, ‘why aren’t you working tomorrow?’ Why aren’t you working tomorrow?
Student: Perché non lavori domani?
Teacher: Very good. Perché non lavori domani. ‘Why don’t you try it?’ What was to try?
Student: Provare.
Teacher: Provare. Why don’t you try it?
Student: Perché non prova… provi?
Teacher: Good, and the it.
Student: Perché non lo provi?
Teacher: Very good. Perché non lo provi. So what was why again?
Student: Perché.
Teacher: Perché. Perché also means because. Perché literally means either for what, or for that, no?When it’s why we can think of it as for what, you know, when we say like why do you work, wemean for what do you work. And when it’s because we can think of it as for that. Because I’mworking – for that I’m working. For a reason that I’m working. So che means both what and that.And per means for. What was to do or to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. I don’t want to do it because today I’m working. So the first bit, ‘I don’t want’?
Student: Non voglio.
Teacher: ‘To do it’?
Student: Non lo voglio fare.
Teacher: ‘Because today I’m working’?
Student: Perché oggi lavoro.
Teacher: Very good. Non lo voglio fare, perché oggi lavoro. ‘I can’t, I’m not able to do it because todayI’m working’? 
Student: Non lo posso fare perché oggi lavoro.
Teacher: Very good. Non lo posso fare, perché oggi lavoro. So the per in perché means for, no? It’s thesame as in per mile, when we say per mile we mean for mile, per gallon it means for a gallon. Theword for please in Italian is per favore, per favore.
Student: Per favore.
Teacher: Meaning for favour. So when you say please what you’re actually saying is for favour, forfavour. For and per are actually the same word, or they come from the same word depending onhow you look at it. In different languages, in even the same language sometimes a consonant canshift; it can become another consonant. This can happen between similar sounds, as we have seenbetween V and B or it can happen between sounds that sound totally dissimilar to us, for example, Pand F. There are a lot of changes between P’s and F’s in different languages. For and per areactually the same word. All that’s happened is that the P has shifted to an F. You can find this inother places for example. Have you heard the word in English fable?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Yes? It’s not a very common one! Related to fable we have to speak in Italian. So fable inEnglish means like a story, like a tale and these tales were told, and to speak is parlare.
Student: Palare.
Teacher: PARLARE. Parlare. So this again is the P to F shift. Like for and per. You as a German speaker,you can find this in very high concentrations between English and German. If you think about it,Apple – Apfel, path – pfad, ship – shiff, and so on, many, many. In Italian not so much, just a fewhere and there. But we can remember parlare meaning to speak, related to fable. The word forItalian is Italiano.
Student: Italiano.
Teacher: I speak Italian.
Student: Parlaro… parlo… parlo italiano.
Teacher: Parlo italiano. Very good. Do you speak Italian?
Student: Parli italiano?
Teacher: Parli italiano.
Student: Parli italiano.
Teacher: Don’t you speak italian?
Student: Non parli italiano?
Teacher: Non parli italiano? I speak it.
Student: Io lo parlo.
Teacher: Very good. And very good for adding the io, /yo/ intuitively. Because you are making thatcontrast you know, so you are emphasising. Non parli italiano e io lo parlo. Why don’t you speakItalian?
Student: Perché non parli italiano? 
Teacher: Perché non parli italiano? Maybe a strange thing to say in Italian! So this is interesting, no? Wehave this F to P shift like in for, per, fable, parlare. And another place we can find this consonantshift is between father and padre. Father in Italian is padre.
Student: Padre.
Teacher: And padre we still see hanging around in English. Like in paternal, like in Jupiter. Jupiteractually means farther of the gods. If you split that up you have pater, like in father and Ju likedeity/ god. Father of the gods. As the biggest planet, it was considered the father of the gods andhistorically, you know, the planets were always associated with gods. Stories about the planetsended up being stories about the gods. But traditionally they were stories about planets and we cansee this through the language. The word for Jupiter in Italian is giove. And in Thursday is giovedì,the day of the Jupiter and it’s the same in English, even though it doesn’t appear like it. Thursday isThors-Day and Thor, the god Thor, the guy with the hammer, is just a manifestation of Jupiter. Theplanet associated with thunder and storms and the sky generally. Zeus, the sky and thunder god inGreek mythology and also the god of the gods or the king of the gods again – Jupiter, father of thegods. So Zeus, Thor, Jupiter all the same person or the same idea. We can also see this in German,no? You remember what the word for Thursday is?
Student: Donnerstag.
Teacher: Donnerstag, which means thunders-day, of course. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: Good day, good day, in Italian is buon giorno.
Student: Buon giorno.
Teacher: That’s BUON and that is carrying the meaning of good. And then giorno which is day spelledGIORNO. So sometimes the I in Italian won’t be heard that clearly like here – we don’t reallypronounce, gi-orno, but giorno. And we also we have this word in English in journal, journal. Ajournal of course related to giorno, day.
Student: Giorno.
Teacher: So giorno is the word for day. How would you say the day?
Student: Il giorno.
Teacher: Il giorno. Good. And how do you think you would say days?
Student: I giorni.
Teacher: Good. Good. Giorni, or the days, i giorni. Very good. Now we’ve spoken about having differenttypes of words, no? Different words types. We’ve got verbs, we have nouns and the verbs are thewords you can put to in front of. Like to be, to run, to dream in their standard form, in their to form.The form we find in the dictionary. So for example if you wanted to make the verb to indicate inItalian we have indication in English, so it’s quite straightforward to find that verb in Italian.
Student: Indicare.
Teacher: Indicare. And this also means to point, like with your finger. Which is of course where we getindex finger from in English, no? It’s the indicating finger. And we said that nouns were words thatyou can put ‘a’ or ‘the’ in front of, no? Like the being rather than to be. The dream, rather than todream. The day – il giorno. How would you say the positivity?
Student: La positività.
Teacher: Good and these feminine ending -a, take la for the. La positività. The negativity?
Student: La negatività.
Teacher: La negatività. Good. So with –tion words, to make –tion words, words like indication, which isa noun, we say the indication. To make that Italian, we would change the –tion to –zione, which isspelled ZIONE, -zione. So indication becomes indicazione.
Student: Indicazione.
Teacher: And these words ending IONE are feminine words. So we saw how we had the -a ending forfeminine nouns and also this -ione ending is also a feminine ending. The condition?
Student: La condizione.
Teacher: La condizione. The tradition?
Student: La tradizione. 
Teacher: La tradizione. So we’ve seen already that with nouns, the -i sound, the i, can give us the plural.We have the day…
Student: Il giorno
Teacher: Il giorno. And then the days?
Student: I giorni.
Teacher: I giorni. The dog, do you remember the dog, related to canine?
Student: Cane. Il cane.
Teacher: Il cane. And the dogs?
Student: I cani.
Teacher: I cani. So to say the we have il for the singular, for the masculine nouns and then the i for theplural. Il cane, i cani. Tell me again, what was condition?
Student: Condizione.
Teacher: Condizione. And the conditions?
Student: Condizione.
Teacher: Again?
Student: Condizione.
Teacher: That’s the singular still, no? So you can change that -e to an -i to get the plural.
Student: Condizioni.
Teacher: Condizioni. Indications?
Student: Indicazioni.
Teacher: Indicazioni. And you can use this like directions, to get directions towards somewhere.Indicazioni. So we see that the /ee/ sound, the -i with our nouns can give us the plural. But with theverbs, the /ee/ sound has a completely different function. It gives us the you form of the verb. So forexample, to speak, related to fable, was?
Student: Parlare.
Teacher: Parlare. And you speak?
Student: Parli.
Teacher: Parli. What was to show? Which we got from demonstrate. Literally something like to monster.
Student: Mostrare.
Teacher: Mostrare. And I show?
Student: Mostro.
Teacher: Mostro, which also means monster. Mostro. Il mostro – the monster. So one is a noun and theother is a verb. I show – mostro, that’s a verb. And then monster – mostro, il mostro the monster –is the noun. How is you show? 
Student: Mostri.
Teacher: Mostri. And how would you say monsters? The plural of mostro.
Student: Mostri.
Teacher: Mostri, again, no? The same. But one is a noun and one is a verb. So although they end uplooking the same they are infect two very different words, behaving in totally different ways. Inmostri – you show- the /ee/ sound has nothing to do with plural. And in mostri – monsters – the/ee/ sound has nothing to do with you. What was to work?
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: Lavorare. And I work?
Student: Lavoro.
Teacher: Lavoro. The work, or the job in Italian, is il lavoro.
Student: Il lavoro.
Teacher: So lavoro – job, the same as lavoro – I work. How would you say you work?
Student: Lavori.
Teacher: Lavori. And the jobs?
Student: I lavori.
Teacher: I lavori, no? So again we get the same. We have lavoro – I work – and lavoro –job. And lavori –you work – and lavori – jobs. So in everyday life it’s very unlikely to confuse you because we willalways have a context. Showing, helping us understand what is being meant. But when reading, forexample, if you decide too soon that you have a noun or a verb when you don’t you might get stuckfor a while, depending on how stubborn you are, and how long it takes you to let go of an idea andlook again! 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: The word for when in Italian, is quando.
Student: Quando.
Teacher: QUANDO, quando. When are you working?
Student: Quando lavori?
Teacher: Good. Quando lavori? When are you working tomorrow?
Student: Quando lavori domani?
Teacher: Good. Quando lavori domani? What was the word for why, again?
Student: Perché.
Teacher: Perché and also because, no? So, we said that che is either what or that. Perché is why meanssomething like for what. And perché as because means something like for that. So, other than whenare you working, quando lavori, you might also hear quando è che lavori? Quando è che lavori?
Student: Quando è che lavori?
Teacher: What are we saying there, literally?
Student: When is it when you are working?
Teacher: When is it that you work? So, you can hear either there. Quando lavori? Quando è che lavori?Or you could even hear the quando and the è contracted – quand’è che lavori? What was to see?
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Vedere. The house in Italian is la casa.
Student: La casa.
Teacher: So that single -s that comes between vowels you can hear more like a z sound or an s sounddepending on the dialect. La casa, la caza. How would you say, I want to see the house?
Student: Voglio vederle… vedere la casa.
Teacher: Voglio vedere la casa. ‘I want to see it’ and we mean the house.
Student: La voglio vedere.
Teacher: Very good. La voglio vedere. Voglio vederla. What was when again?
Student: Quando.
Teacher: Quando. ‘When are you seeing the house?’
Student: Quando vederi vedi – quando vedi la casa?
Teacher: Very good. Quando vedi la casa. What else could you say? You could say, when is that you seethe house? How would that be?
Student: Quando è che vedi la casa? 
Teacher: Good. And here we hear the difference quite nicely, between the two different E’s. Quando è chevedi la casa? Although I should mention that what e you should pronounce. It’s generally not veryimportant because it changes a lot between different dialects. The only time really that we can sayit’s especially important is the difference between è he/she/it is and e the word for and – è and e,no? That difference is important all across the board in the different dialects of Italian. Butotherwise, it’s not so important. So maybe someone from the south, you hear them pronounce the eof è and che in the same way. It’s not very important. Tell me again what was the word for house?
Student: Casa.
Teacher: Casa. Good. To get the plural of most words ending in -a we would change the -a to an -e. Sorather than an -i giving us /ee/ sound, now we will have the -e giving us the /eh/ sound. So casa ishouse. How do you say houses?
Student: Case.
Teacher: Case. How is the house?
Student: La casa.
Teacher: If we want to say the houses, the -a of la will also change to an -e.
Student: Le case.
Teacher: Le case. I want to see the houses.
Student: Voglio vedere le case.
Teacher: Good. Voglio vedere le case. Now if you say I want to see them and you mean the houses, whatdo you think the sound for them might be. If we have la for feminine it, for feminine them whatmight we have?
Student: Le.
Teacher: Le. Good. So, I want to see them?
Student: Le voglio vedere.
Teacher: Le voglio vedere. Voglio vederle. When are you seeing the houses?
Student: Quando vedi le case?
Teacher: Good. Quando vedi le case? When do you see them? And we mean the houses.
Student: Quando le vedi?
Teacher: Quando le vedi? Tell me again what was the house?
Student: La casa.
Teacher: La casa. La cosa is the thing. La cosa.
Student: La cosa.
Teacher: How would you say things?
Student: Cose.
Teacher: Cose. And the things? 
Student: Le cose.
Teacher: Le cose. Good. But thing – the singular.
Student: Cosa.
Teacher: Cosa. Tell me again the word for why.
Student: Perché.
Teacher: Perché, and we said that this was literally for what. What thing, so che cosa.
Student: Che cosa.
Teacher: And often just shortened to cosa or che, but most commonly cosa, means what. So, in Italian tosay what you will say what thing, most of the time, che cosa. And that is often shortened to justcosa rather than being shortened just to what it is often shortened just to thing, no. So, if you say forexample in Italian, ‘what do you see?’ You will say what thing do you see, or just, thing you see?
Student: Che cosa vedi?
Teacher: Che cosa vedi? Or?
Student: Cosa vedi?
Teacher: Cosa vedi. So, in colloquial spoken Italian, in informal Italian, this is the most common way ofsaying, what do you see. Cosa vedi? In fact, if you don’t understand what somebody tells you, youmight just say ‘cosa?’
Student: Cosa?
Teacher: Thing? What? But you could also hear ‘che cosa vedi?’ ‘Cosa è che vedi?’ ‘Che vedi?’ ‘Checosa è che vedi?’ No, there’s all those different ways of saying it. Even like how I mentionedquando è can become quand’è, the same could happen also with cosa è, cos’è. Cos’è che verdi?But in colloquial Italian, maybe the most common is just cosa verdi, thing you see. What was todemonstrate?
Student: Demostrare.
Teacher: Good, but not de, but…?
Student: Ah! Dimostrare.
Teacher: Dimostrare.
Student: Dimostrare.
Teacher: Dimostrare. So, in dimostrare we have di meaning of or from and then mostrare meaningshow or monster. Of showing, of monster, of an omen. So, there we have di for of or from. Whatwas to speak?
Student: Parlare.
Teacher: Parlare. If you want to say in Italian, what are you talking about? What are you speaking about?You will just say: ‘Of what you speak?’ Or, ‘of thing you speak?’ So how would that be?
Student: Che cosa parlar- parli? Che cosa parli? 
Teacher: Of what thing you speak?
Student: Di cosa parli?
Teacher: Di cosa parli? Di che cosa parli? Di che cosa è che parli?
Student: Di che cosa è che parli?
Teacher: It’s possible, no? It depends how emphatic you want to be. Sometimes we make our sentenceslonger, just to be more emphatic, just to hold the attention, no? But the more common simple waywould be: di cosa parli? What are you talking about? Of thing you speak? Implied, of what thingdo you speak? What was to see?
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Good. I see.
Student: Vedo
Teacher: I see you?
Student: Ti vedo.
Teacher: Ti vedo. So the you, as in I see you, is ti – TI. But you like in you see. The optional you, that wedon’t have to use, but we can do so for emphasis, is tu, TU, tu.
Student: Tu.
Teacher: So if we want to say YOU see, and we emphasise you, we can use that tu.
Student: Tu vedi.
Teacher: Tu vedi. Do you see the house?
Student: Tu vedi la casa?
Teacher: Tu vedi la casa? Do you see it? And we mean the house.
Student: Tu la vedi?
Teacher: Tu la vedi? What if we meant the houses? Do you see them?
Student: Tu le vedi?
Teacher: Tu le vedi? When are you seeing the house?
Student: Quando vedi la casa?
Teacher: Quando vedi la casa? Or if we wanted to include the word for you, it’s quite flexible. Quandovedi la casa tu? Tu quando vedi la casa? Tu quando vedi la casa, would probably be the mostnatural order, but we can put it on the end to be especially emphatic, no. Quando vedi la casa tu?You might also hear the information being repeated. Quando la vedi la casa? It might also happen– When do you see it, the house? What do you see it?
Student: Che cosa vedi?
Teacher: Good. Che cosa vedi? Cosa vedi? What do you see?
Student: Che cosa vedi tu? 
Teacher: Tu che cosa vedi? Che cosa vedi tu? Do you see the thing?
Student: Tu vedi la cosa?
Teacher: Good. Vedi la cosa? Tu vedi la cosa? And the plural of thing? The word for things?
Student: Cose.
Teacher: Cose. And the things.
Student: Le cose.
Teacher: Very good. So, we’ve seen two ways of making the plural, no? We can have an -i sound forwords ending in -o or -e. We saw for example cane – dog and cani – dogs. Or, giorno – day. Andgiorni – days. We saw indicazione and indicazioni, so the -i sound /ee/ for words ending in -o or -eand then for our nouns ending in -a we have an -e or an /eh/ sound to make the plural. Casa – case.Cosa – cose. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was the word for house?
Student: Casa.
Teacher: Casa, good. And thing?
Student: Cose. Cosa.
Teacher: Cosa. Good. Cose, what is it?
Student: Plural.
Teacher: Plural, things. Good. And we said that cosa – thing, is also used like what by itself or incombination with che. Che cosa, what thing. Which is spelled CHE. So, CH gives us this hard /k/sound. We already saw how CE and CI gives us /che/ and /chi/, no? So it’s counter intuitivecomparing with English. A thing, a thing, is una cosa.
Student: Una cosa.
Teacher: This can be used like something. For example, if you say ‘I want to show you something’, youcan say, ‘I want to show you a thing’. So how would that be?
Student: Voglio mostrare – Ti voglio mostrare una cosa.
Teacher: Very good. Ti voglio mostrare una cosa. Or, voglio mostrarti una cosa. What was to do or tomake? Do you remember?
Student: Fare?
Teacher: Fare. Good. So more colloquially in Italian you could hear for to show, to make see. So insteadof to show, mostrare, you could hear fare vedere, no? To make see. So how would you say: I wantto show you something, I want to show you a thing in this way. So literally, I want to make you seea thing.
Student: Ti voglio fare vedere una cosa.
Teacher: Ti voglio fare vedere una cosa. Or where else could that ti go?
Student: Voglio fare vederti una cosa.
Teacher: So there it might confuse the meaning, no? I want to make to see you. So maybe the best placefor it would be ‘I want to make you to see a thing’. How would that be?
Student: Voglio farti vedere una cosa.Good. Voglio farti vedere una cosa. Good. How would you say, do you see me?
Student: Mi vedi?
Teacher: Mi vedi? And what if we were to use the word for you?
Student: Tu mi vedi?
Teacher: Tu mi vedi? Good.
Student: Tu mi vedi? 
Teacher: How would you say, I see you?
Student: Ti vedo.
Teacher: Ti vedo, no? So when its you seeing we have tu but the you of I see you is ti, ti vedo. Do yousee yourself? How would that be? So this is just, do you see you?
Student: Tu ti vedi?
Teacher: Good. Tu ti vedi. Do you see yourself? Tu ti vedi? What was I want?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. You want is vuoi.
Student: Vuoi.
Teacher: This is VUOI. So its quite irregular. From voglio (VOGLIO) to voui (VOUI). But we can seethat its still ending in -i. We still have that -i for you. So you want. Tu vuoi.
Student: Vuoi.
Teacher: Do you want it?
Student: Lo vuoi?
Teacher: Lo vuoi? And of course we mentioned how voglio is related to volunteer, no? Volunteer is theone who wants to do something so we have voglio and vuoi related to volunteer, giving us themeaning of want. Don’t you want to do it?
Student: Lo voglio fare non? Non lo vuoi fare?
Teacher: Good. Non lo vuoi fare? Don’t you want to do it? Very good. What do you want to do?
Student: Que cosa vuoi fare?
Teacher: Very good. Que cosa vuoi fare? What was the word for why, again?
Student: Perché.
Teacher: Perché. Why don’t you want to do it?
Student: Perché non vuoi farlo?
Teacher: Good. Perché non vuoi farlo? Perché non lo vuoi fare? Why don’t you want to show me? Whydon’t you want to make me see?
Student: Perché non vuoi farmi vedere?
Teacher: Very good. Perché non vuoi farmi vedere? To come, to come in Italian is venire. That’sVENIRE. And this word is all over English. We have venue – and venue is a place you come to. Wehave avenue, a place you come though. We have venture and adventure. Convenient. What does conmean?
Student: With.
Teacher: With. So, when something is convenient, is when things come together, no? Souvenir. Souvenirwhich is actually just the French word for memory, which means something like sub-venire. Tocome up from below, a memory, a souvenir. So, venire is to come. Venire. 
Student: Venire.
Teacher: Do you want to come?
Student: Vuoi venire?
Teacher: Vuoi venire? Don’t you want to come?
Student: Non vuoi venire?
Teacher: Non vuoi venire? Why don’t you want to come?
Student: Perché non vuoi venire?
Teacher: Perché non vuoi venire? What was house, again?
Student: Casa.
Teacher: Casa. Home can just be a casa, a casa – which is literally to house, like to in the sense ofdirection, but used like home, or at home.
Student: A casa.
Teacher: So you could say for example, do you want to come home? Or to my house, might be impliedthere.
Student: Vuoi venire a casa?
Teacher: Good. Vuoi venire a casa. You remember what was the word for late?
Student: Tardi.
Teacher: Tardi. And later?
Student: Più taride.
Teacher: Più tardi. Do you want to come home later?
Student: Vuoi venire a casa più tardi?
Teacher: Good. Vuoi venire a casa più tardi? What was the word for possible?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Good, possibile. And possibility?
Student: Possibilità.
Teacher: Possibilità. Very good. And from this we can get I can, which was…?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso. Posso and voglio have the same irregularity for tu, for the you form. So, just as we hadvuoi for you want, we have puoi for you can. PUOI. So again, still ending -i to show that it’s you.Tu puoi.
Student: Tu puoi.
Teacher: So what was again, you want?
Student: Vuoi. 
Teacher: Vuoi. And you can?
Student: Puoi.
Teacher: So maybe we want to pronounce a little bit more the U at the beginning, so it’s a little bit morelike puoi.
Student: Puoi. Puoi.
Teacher: Puoi, much better. Puoi. Can you come?
Student: Puoi venire?
Teacher: Puoi venire? Can you come home later?
Student: Puoi venire a casa più tardi?
Teacher: Very good. Puoi venire a casa più tardi? Do you remember the word for when?
Student: Quando.
Teacher: Quando. Very good. QUANDO. Quando. When can you come home?
Student: Quando puoi venire a casa?
Teacher: Quando puoi venire a casa? So, this can be home or it can imply, it can also imply, my house,no? But if it’s not implied or if you want to show it or stress it you can also say a casa mia, a casamia. So how would that be, ‘can you come to my house later’?
Student: Puoi venire a casa mia più tardi?
Teacher: Very good. Puoi venire a casa mia più tardi? When can you come to my house?
Student: Quando puoi venire a casa mia?
Teacher: Quando puoi venire a casa mia? Or just a casa depending on the context. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: How was I want?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. And you want?
Student: Vuoi. Vuoi.
Teacher: Vuoi. Good. I can?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso. And you can?
Student: Puoi.
Teacher: Puoi, very good. What was again to do or to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. You do or you make is also a little irregular. We have tu fai. FAI. Tu fai.
Student: Tu fai.
Teacher: So how would you say, what are you doing?
Student: Che cosa fai?
Teacher: Che cosa fai? Cosa fai? What are you doing later?
Student: Che fai più tardi?
Teacher: You could hear che fai più tardi, no? Che fai più tardi? Cosa fai più tardi? Che cosa fai piùtardi? What do you want to do later?
Student: Che cosa vuoi fare più tardi?
Teacher: Very good. Che cosa / cosa vuoi fare più tardi? What do you want to show me? What do youwant to make me see?
Student: Che cosa fare - no. Che cosa vuoi farmi vedere?
Teacher: Very good. Che cosa vuoi farmi vedere? Good. Well we could also use mostrare. But incolloquial, spoken Italian fare vedere is probably most common. To sell, to sell in Italian isvendere, vendere.
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: So, this is where we get vending machine from in English. This is a selling machine, a vendingmachine. Or a vendor, like a street vendor is a street seller. So vendere – to sell. Do you noticesomething odd about vendere? The accent mostly we have it on the ending no, in the to form. If wethink cancellare, parlare. We have the accent the -are in the to form or on the -ere, -ire, venire, butnot here. Vendere. So, some Italian verbs have the accent third from the end. Vendere. But only afew, mostly we have the accent on the penultimate syllable, on the second from the end in the to form. Indicare – to indicate, cancellare, venire. But here vendere – to sell. How would you say,you can sell the house.
Student: Puoi vendere la casa.
Teacher: Very good. Puoi vendere la casa. You can sell the houses.
Student: Puoi vendere le case.
Teacher: Very good. Puoi vendere le case. You can sell the things.
Student: Puoi vendere le cose.
Teacher: Very good. Puoi vendere le cose. Are you selling the things? Do you sell the things?
Student: Vendi le cose?
Teacher: Very good. Vendi le cose? So, most nouns that end -a tend to go to -e for the plural. Casa – case.Cosa – cose. But not always. Those words with the accent on the ending, that we got from -ity, solet’s find some more of them. Priority, how would that be in Italian?
Student: Prio- priorità
Teacher: Priorità. Responsibility? The I in -ibility is an A in Italian, so it’s more like responsAbility. Howwould that be?
Student: Responsabilità.
Teacher: Responsabilità. Activity is very similar. Instead of CT, we get two T’s there. So how would thatbe, ‘activity’?
Student: Attività.
Teacher: Attività. So we get two Ts. The C turns into a T – it assimilates to the next T. So these nouns, our-ity -ità nouns, when they go into the plural, they stay the same. So, priorità can mean priority orpriorities. We’ll only know by the context or for example if we have the word for the. Because theword for the will still change for the plural. So, we have la priorità for the singular and thepriorities, what does la become?
Student: Le.
Teacher: Le. But priorità stays the same. So how would you say, the priorities?
Student: Le priorità.
Teacher: And it’s a T on the end – priorità. How would say the possibility?
Student: La possibilità.
Teacher: La possibilità. And the plural? The possibilities?
Student: Le possibilità.
Teacher: Le possibilità. So with these -ità nouns, we only know its plural by the word for the. How is thecity?
Student: La citta.
Teacher: And the cities? 
Student: Le città.
Teacher: Le città. Do you want to see the cities?
Student: Vuoi vedere- vuoi vedere le città?
Teacher: Very good. Vuoi vedere le città? But generally speaking we see that we also have the -achanging to an -e to e for the plural. So we have cosa for thing and then things is?
Student: Cose.
Teacher: Cose. We mentioned briefly la persona which was the person and how would you say persons orpeople?
Student: Le persone.
Teacher: Persone or le persone – the people, the persons. But not for our -ità nouns, no? So, thepersonality is?
Student: La personalità.
Teacher: La personalità. And the personalities in plural?
Student: Le personalità.
Teacher: Le personalità. Good. The celebrity?
Student: Celebr—Celebrità.
Teacher: Very good. The celebrity, with the word for the?
Student: La celebrità.
Teacher: Very good. La celebrità and the CE of course giving us /che/. And the plural? The celebrities?
Student: Le celebrità.
Teacher: Le celebrità. Good. The word for friend in Italian is amico. AMICO, amico.
Student: Amico.
Teacher: For a male. For a female friend, what might it be?
Student: Amica.
Teacher: Amica and in the plural, female friends?
Student: Amiche.
Teacher: Amiche.
Student: Amiche.
Teacher: Amiche. Amiche is spelled AMICHE. Here we have to put the CH to maintain the hard /k/sound, otherwise the CE would give a /che/ sound AmiCHE which is not the word its amiche. Sothat’s spelled AMICHE. So like I mentioned before its quite counter-intuitive coming from English.My friend is il mio amico, if we me male friend. Il mio amico.
Student: Il mio amico. 
Teacher: So, what we say there is the my friend. Il mio amico. How would you say, I want to see myfriend today? I want to see my friend today?
Student: Ochi. Ochi
Teacher: Oggi.
Student: Oggi voglio- Oggi voglio vedere il mio amico.
Teacher: Very good. Oggi voglio vedere il mio amico. Very good. What was to sell again? Connected tovending machine, street vendor…
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere And we had the accent there at the beginning no? Vendere, or three away from the endalso at the beginning. Vendere. To know in Italian in the sense of knowing a person or a place, oreven to meet, to know the first time – to get to know, is conoscere, conoscere.
Student: Conoscere.
Teacher: So again we have the accent third from the end, like in vendere, conoscere, not conoSCERe –coNOSCere. We have this of course in recognise, when you recognise somebody in English youREcognise them. You reCONOSERE them, you re-know them. So conoscere, meaning to know,used for like knowing a person or a place or also to get to know, to meet for the first time. ‘Do youwant to meet my friend?’ ‘Do you want to know my friend – to cognise my friend’?
Student: Vuoi conoscere il ami- il mio amico.
Teacher: Very good. So, we had il mio amico for a male friend. My female friend is la mia amica. So -a -a -a all the way down. La mia amica. So il becomes la and also mio becomes mia. Do you want tomeet my friend, and we mean a female friend.
Student: Vuoi conoscere la mia amica?
Teacher: Very good. Vuoi conoscere la mia amica? How would you say I want to see my friend later (westill mean a feminine friend) – I want to see my friend later.
Student: Voglio vedere la mia amica più tardi.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio vedere la mia amica più tardi. So, we had il mio amico, no? La mia amica.What was female friends? The plural for female friends? Amica becomes?
Student: Amiche.
Teacher: So how might my female friends be? If we have il mio amico, la mia amica, what might happenfor the my friends for female.
Student: Le mie amiche.
Teacher: Very good. Le mie amiche. So here -e -e -e all the way down. Le mie amiche. Do you want tomeet my friends? And we mean female friends.
Student: Vuoi conoSCEre le mie amiche?
Teacher: Good. And where is the accent on the verb to know?
Student: Conoscere. 
Teacher: Conoscere.
Student: Vuoi conoscere le mie amiche.
Teacher: Good. Vuoi conoscere le mie amiche. Do you want to meet the city? So this is quite an oddsentence to say in English. So here the translation might be something more like to get to know. Somaybe you come to visit me and I’ll ask you, you know, do you want to go meet the city? Do youwant to go and get to know it. So, do you want to get to know the city?
Student: Vuoi conoscere la citta?
Teacher: Good. Vuoi conoscere la citta? The /sheh/ sound in conoscere is spelled SCE. So, we’ve seenhow CE gives us /che/, but SCE gives us /sheh/ like in conoscere. CONOSCERE. Do you want toget to know the cities?
Student: Vuoi conoscere le città?
Teacher: Very good. Vuoi conoscere le città? And we’ve seen how città, being one of these nouns that weget from our conversion from -ity to ità, doesn’t go into plural, the noun itself, only for the. Lecittà. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So we saw conoscere which means to know in some circumstance like if you know a person or aplace, and also get to know – conoscere.
Student: conoscere.
Teacher: How would you say you know?
Student: Conosci.
Teacher: Conosci. So we have SCI giving us /shi/. CI would give us /chi/, but SCI, /shi/. Conosci. Do youknow me?
Student: Mi conosci?
Teacher: Mi conosci? And what if we were to use the word for you? Do you know me?
Student: Tu mi conosci?
Teacher: Tu mi conosci? Do you know my friend? Let’s refer to a male friend.
Student: Conosci il mio amico?
Teacher: Conosci il mio amico? And a female friend.
Student: Conosci la mia amica?
Teacher: Conosci la mia amica. Don’t you know my female friends? So, don’t you know my friends, andthey are female, all of them.
Student: Non conosci le mie amiche?
Teacher: Very good. Non conosci le mie amiche? Very good. How is, I want it?
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Lo voglio. So the word for it was...?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. If we refer to a masculine thing or something general that doesn’t have a gender, lo. But ifwe refer specifically to something feminine, like a house, I want it and we mean the house, what dowe use?
Student: La voglio.
Teacher: La voglio. Lo and la can also be used for him and her. Lo and la also mean him and her. So, forexample, if you say do you know him, you can use lo. How is that?
Student: Lo conosci?
Teacher: Lo conosci? Do you know her?
Student: La conosci?
Teacher: La conosci? How do you think I know, from conoscere would be?
Student: conosho. conoshco. 
Teacher: So its CE and CI that gives us /che/ and /chi/, and then SCE and SCI that gives us /sheh/ and/shi/. But it’s only with the E and the I that we get these odd sounds popping up. Otherwise it’smuch more intuitive.
Student: Conosco.
Teacher: Conosco. So now we have SCO which just gives us /sco/, conosco. I know you.
Student: Ti conosco.
Teacher: Ti conosco. I know him.
Student: Lo conosco.
Teacher: Lo conosco. I know her.
Student: La conosco.
Teacher: La conosco. I see her.
Student: La vedo.
Teacher: La vedo. I don’t see her.
Student: Non la vedo.
Teacher: Non la vedo. I want to know her, which would mean more like I want to meet her.
Student: La voglio conosc- conoscere.
Teacher: Very good. Very good on the accent there. La voglio conoscere, la voglio conoscere. Do youknow her?
Student: La conosci?
Teacher: La conosci? What if we wanted to be emphatic? Do you know her?
Student: Tu la conosci?
Teacher: Very good. Tu la conosci? And this tu is the flexible element, no? It is not necessary, it’s notessential to put it. It’s much more flexible. So if we wanted to be more emphatic we could say, laconosci tu? But there would have to be some reason, some context, to be emphatic there so itdoesn’t sound odd. La conosci tu? Like I didn’t expect that. So the word for you, in the sense ofyou see, you know, is…?
Student: Tu.
Teacher: Tu. Your friend, if we mean a male friend, is il tuo amico.
Student: Il tuo amico.
Teacher: Il tuo amico. I want to know, I want to meet, your friend.
Student: Voglio conoscere il tuo amico.
Teacher: Voglio conoscere il tuo amico. And a female friend?
Student: Voglio conoscere la tua amica.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio conoscere la tua amica. How would you say I want it, again? I want it. 
Student: Lo voglio.
Teacher: Lo voglio. And I want them, for masculine things, or mixed things.
Student: Li voglio.
Teacher: Li voglio. Very good. And what if you want feminine things like the houses. I want them.
Student: Le – le voglio.
Teacher: Le voglio. So these words for them, li and le, can also mean them, as in people, referring topeople. Just as lo and la can mean it or him or her, li and le can refer to things or people. So if yousay, for example, I know them and you mean people. How would that be?
Student: Li conosco.
Teacher: Li conosco. So li would refer to a masculine group or a mixed group, no? Li conosco. But if theywere all females, how would you say that?
Student: Le conosco.
Teacher: Le conosco. And I want to get to know them. I want to meet them.
Student: Le voglio conoscere.
Teacher: Le voglio conoscere. And here, what gender do we refer to with le?
Student: To females.
Teacher: To females. And what if it was a male group, or a mixed group?
Student: Li voglio conoscere.
Teacher: Li voglio conoscere. I want to see them.
Student: Li voglio vedere.
Teacher: Li voglio vedere. We have invitation in English so how is to invite in Italian?
Student: Invitare.
Teacher: Invitare. I want to invite them, and we mean two females.
Student: Le voglio invitare.
Teacher: Le voglio invitare. Voglio invitarle. And I want to invite them and we mean 100 females andone male, it still goes into the masculine because this is what we use for mixed groups. So, I want toinvite them.
Student: Li voglio invitare.
Teacher: Li voglio invitare. You want.
Student: Vuoi.
Teacher: Do you want to invite them?
Student: Li vuoi invitare?
Teacher: Li vuoi invitare? Vuoi invitarli? And how was you can, which had a very similar irregularity tovuoi. 
Student: Puoi.
Teacher: Puoi. Good. Can you invite them? And we mean females.
Student: Puoi invitarle?
Teacher: Good. Puoi invitarle, referring to females and a masculine or a mixed group – can you invitethem?
Student: Puoi invitarli?
Teacher: Puoi invitarli? Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What as to invite?
Student: Invitare.
Teacher: Invitare. And I invite?
Student: Invito.
Teacher: Good. You invite.
Student: Inviti.
Teacher: Inviti. So we have the /oh/ sound on the -o showing that the verb is for I, and the -i or the /ee/sound showing that it is for you. The ending for we is -iamo, IAMO, -iamo.
Student: -iamo.
Teacher: So we invite is…
Student: Invitiamo.
Teacher: Invitiamo. We’re inviting you.
Student: Ti invitiamo.
Teacher: Ti invitiamo. And this can me like we pay. So you know maybe you invite somebody to dinnerand you actually say we’re inviting you, ti invitiamo, it means we pay, we’ll pay. Andare, andarein Italian means to go. Andare.
Student: Andare.
Teacher: You might be familiar with this by the musical speed, andante. Andante. This is, if you’ve everplayed any music, on the sheet music, you know, you can see andante. Which is the speed of themusic which means going speed. Which doesn’t really give a lot of information but musiciansunderstand it! Andare – to go. How would you say, we go?
Student: Andiamo.
Teacher: Andiamo and you will hear this a lot in Italian like let’s go, andiamo, let’s go. So we see withthis phrase, andiamo, that just with the tone of voice in Italian you can get the meaning of let’s. Wedon’t have any word here to say let’s go, we just show it with the voice. Andiamo – let’s go.
Student: Andiamo.
Teacher: Good. You can also show with your voice, shall we go?
Student: Andiamo?
Teacher: Andiamo? Shall we go? Andiamo? What was to sell, again?
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere, very good. We’re selling it.
Student: Lo vendiamo.
Teacher: Lo vendiamo. And what if we were selling a feminine thing? 
Student: La vendiamo.
Teacher: La vendiamo. Shall we sell it?
Student: Lo vendiamo?
Teacher: Lo vendiamo? Shall we sell it? What do you think? Lo vendiamo? What if you were to say weare selling them, and you mean masculine or mixed things.
Student: Li vendiamo.
Teacher: Li vendiamo. And feminine things?
Student: Le vendiamo.
Teacher: Le vendiamo. And shall we sell them?
Student: Le vendiamo?
Teacher: Le vendiamo? All of this you can do with your voice in Italian. What was to come? Related toavenue, convenient, souvenir.
Student: Venire.
Teacher: Venire. We are coming?
Student: Veniamo.
Teacher: Veniamo. So we had vendiamo we sell and veniamo we come, we are coming. Shall we comelater?
Student: Veniamo più tardi?
Teacher: Veniamo più tardi? When shall we come?
Student: Quando veniamo?
Teacher: Quando veniamo? But of course this can me when are we coming, when do we come, whenshall we come, just depending on the context. What was to see, related to video?
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Vedere. We see.
Student: Vediamo.
Teacher: Vediamo. So we have vendiamo – we sell, veniamo – we come, and vediamo – we see. Sogoing back to the to form and you will never get confused, to go back to the to form, whether itsvedere, vendere, venire. We see you.
Student: Ti vediamo. Ti vediamo.
Teacher: Good. And what did you do with that confusion, to get over the confusion?
Student: I go back to infinitive.
Teacher: Exactly, you go back to the to form, we have to see vedere - vediamo. Very good. Ti vediamo –we see you. The word for us is ci, ci.
Student: Ci. 
Teacher: How do you spell that?
Student: C, CHI?
Teacher: CHI in Italian would give us /ki/, it would give us the hard K.
Student: Oh, ok, so it’s just CI.
Teacher: CI. So kind of counter intuitive coming from English. CI, ci. So ci means us and it can also meaneach other, one another, ourselves, all of that, all of those meanings are included in ci. How wouldyou say, we see each other?
Student: Ci vediamo.
Teacher: Ci vediamo. And this is used like, you know, see you as a greeting or to say goodbye, see you, civediamo. Literally we see each other, rather than the see you that we have in English. Ci vediamo.What was the word capital? What did we do with English Latin words that ended -al?
Student: Capitale.
Teacher: Capitale, and it ends in -e. So how might it go into plural?
Student: With an -i.
Teacher: Very good.
Student: Capitali.
Teacher: Capitali. Like, cane – dog, cani – dogs, which is masculine no, il cane – i cani. But capitale is afeminine word, we have la capitale. So when we are deciding how to make something plural, wedon’t worry too much about the gender of the word, but rather how it ends. We saw that an -e goesto -i, cane – cani. Indicazione- indicazioni, which was also feminine. So the same for capitale,capitali. The capital?
Student: La capitale.
Teacher: La capitale. And the capitals.
Student: Le capitali.
Teacher: Le capitali. So we don’t want to think what gender is it, rather than how does it end. What wasto know?
Student: Conoscere.
Teacher: Conoscere. I want to know, I want to see, the capital. So I want to see, like for the first time, Iwant to get to know, the capital.
Student: Voglio conoscere la capitale.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio conoscere la capitale. Cap-, the cap- that we have in capitale, means head.Actually the word capo in Italian means boss. How would you say bosses?
Student: Capi.
Teacher: Capi. Capire, capire, is to understand.
Student: Capire. 
Teacher: Capire. We understand.
Student: Capiriamo. Capiamo.
Teacher: Good. Capiamo. good. We don’t understand.
Student: Non capiamo.
Teacher: Non capiamo. So this is literally something like to head. To head – to understand. We don’tunderstand you.
Student: Non ti capiamo.
Teacher: Non ti capiamo. We don’t understand him or it.
Student: Non lo capiamo.
Teacher: Non lo capiamo. Or her, we don’t understand her.
Student: Non la capiamo.
Teacher: Non la capiamo. We don’t understand them referring to a male or a mixed group.
Student: Non li capiamo.
Teacher: Very good. So we make lo plural and we get li. Non li capiamo. And what if we meant females,we don’t understand them.
Student: Non le capiamo.
Teacher: Non le capiamo. What was the word for us or each other or…
Student: Ci
Teacher: Ci. CI, ci. We don’t understand each other.
Student: Non ci capiamo.
Teacher: Non ci capiamo. The word cape in English also comes from this cap- root. And to escape is anawesome verb. It means something like to get away, leaving the pursuer, the one chasing you, withnothing but your cape. It literally means something like out of cape. So you get out of your cape andyou leave them with your cape. And it’s the same in Italian – nearly. To escape is scappare,scappare.
Student: Scappare.
Teacher: Good, you can hear the two P’s because you pronounced them. And we don’t have the e- at thebeginning like we do in English, escape. So it’s SCAPPARE. Scappare.
Student: Scappare.
Teacher: And this is also used kind of colloquially, in Italian or in some Italian dialects. You can say forexample, it’s late, let’s escape. It’s late, let’s escape, let’s split. What was the word for late, like inEnglish slang as well.
Student: Tardi.
Teacher: Tardi. It’s late, let’s escape.
Student: È tardi, scappiamo 
Teacher: Very good. È tardi, scappiamo. It’s late, I’m getting out of here, I’m escaping.
Student: È tardi, scappo.
Teacher: Good. È tardi, scappo. È tardi, io scappo. Io scappo. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So we had the word ci, CI for each other, ourselves, one another and also just plain old us. Whatwas to prepare? We have preparation in English, so..?
Student: Preparare.
Teacher: Preperare. We prepare ourselves or we get ready, we’re getting ready.
Student: Ci prepar- prepariamo.
Teacher: Good, ci prepariamo. We’re getting ready later.
Student: Ci prepariamo più tardi.
Teacher: Ci prepariamo più tardi. What was I want?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. We want. How might we want be, going from voglio?
Student: Vogliamo.
Teacher: Vogliamo. But you want was?
Student: Vuoi.
Teacher: Good, VUOI, vuoi. Do you want to see us?
Student: Ci vuoi vedere?
Teacher: Good. Ci vuoi vedere? Vuoi vederci? So, we have io voglio, tu vuoi and then noi vogliamo. So,the word for we is noi.
Student: Noi.
Teacher: NOI. So, we have noi for we, and the word for us?
Student: Ci.
Teacher: Ci. Very different. So how do you say, we want, emphasising the word for we?
Student: Noi vogliamo.
Teacher: Noi vogliamo. We don’t want.
Student: Noi non vogliamo.
Teacher: Noi non vogliamo. We don’t want it. Let’s say the word for we still. We don’t want it.
Student: Noi non lo vogliamo.
Teacher: Good. Noi non lo vogliamo. Non lo vogliamo noi. We want to see each other.
Student: Ci vogliamo vedere.
Teacher: Good. Ci vogliamo vedere. Or noi ci vogliamo vedere. We don’t want to see each other.
Student: Non ci vogliamo vedere.
Teacher: Good and what if you were to include the word for we. We don’t want to see each other. 
Student: Noi non ci vogliamo vedere.
Teacher: Good. Noi non ci vogliamo vedere. So, we can always just think about what comes first andthen what comes next, rather than translating the whole idea all together. How would you say wewant to get ready, we want to prepare ourselves?
Student: Vogliamo preparachi.
Teacher: Good. Vogliamo preparachi. Ci vogliamo preparare. What was I can, again?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso and how do you think we can, we are able, might be?
Student: Possiamo.
Teacher: Possiamo. Can we see your friend later? Can we see, are we able, to see your friend later?
Student: Possiamo vedere il tuo amico più tardi?
Teacher: Good. Very good. Possiamo vedere il tuo amico più tardi? Are we seeing your friend late? Arewe seeing your friend later?
Student: Vediamo il tuo amico più tardi?
Teacher: Vediamo il tuo amico più tardi? Shall we see your friend later?
Student: Vediamo vedere il tuo amico più tardi?
Teacher: You said, we are seeing to see!
Student: Oh!
Teacher: Shall we see your friend later, is just do we see your friend later, with a tone of voice and acontext.
Student: Vediamo il tuo amico più tardi?
Teacher: Good. Vediamo il tuo amico più tardi? Good. So, shall we don’t need the word for this inItalian, we can just do that with the voice. Vediamo il tuo amico più tardi? How would you say wecan’t see each other? Or this could also mean we are not allowed to see each other.
Student: Non possiamo vederci.
Teacher: Good. Non possiamo vederci. Non ci possiamo vedere. So, we have posso – I can, possiamo –we can, but you can was…?
Student: Puoi.
Teacher: Puoi. Good. PUOI. Puoi. Can you see us tomorrow? What was tomorrow?
Student: Domani.
Teacher: Domani. Can you see us tomorrow?
Student: Puoi vederci domani?
Teacher: Puoi vederci domani? What was to do or to make?
Student: Fare. 
Teacher: Fare and you do or you make, which was slightly irregular?
Student: Fai.
Teacher: Fai. If it were regular, we would take away the -are and be left with fi. But we’re not, we havefai. You do, you make – tu fai. To give is dare.
Student: Dare.
Teacher: So, we have fare – to do or to make and dare – to give, DARE. And you give has the sameirregularity as fai. So how would that sound?
Student: Dai.
Teacher: Dai. Tu dai. And this is also used like an expression in Italian. Dai is used like come on, come on– hurry up. It’s used like come on in the sense of give over, stop if trying to fool me or you know,what are you talking about, or you’re kidding. Used like no way. It’s all depending on the tone ofvoice. Dai – come on. Dai – no way. Ma dai, ma being but – but no. Ma dai. Literally just yougive. How would we give be?
Student: Diamo.
Teacher: Diamo. And with the word for we.
Student: Noi diamo.
Teacher: Noi diamo. The word for book is libro. LIBRO. Just like library in English. Of course, these twowords are connected. Library and libro – book or il libro – the book.
Student: Il libro.
Teacher: How would you say, can we see each other tomorrow because I have to give you the book? Solet’s start from the beginning. Can we see each other tomorrow?
Student: Possiamo vederci domani?
Teacher: Because I have to, because I owe, to give you the book.
Student: Perché devo darti il libro.
Teacher: Very good. Possiamo vederci domani perché devo darti il libro. We can’t give you the bookstomorrow because we’re working. We can’t give you the books tomorrow, let’s begin there.
Student: Non possiamo darti i libri domani.Good. Non possiamo darti or non ti possiamo dare i libri domani, because we’re working.
Student: Perché lavoramo – lavoriamo – lavoriamo.
Teacher: Perché lavoriamo. Non possiamo darti il libri domani perché lavoriamo. Very well done. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: How was I can?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Good and we can?
Teacher: Possiamo.
Teacher: And you can?
Student: Possi.
Teacher: It was a little more irregular, no?
Student: Puoi. Puoi.
Teacher: Puoi. PUOI, good. So it still ends in -i, no? PUOI, poui. And how was the book? You can thinkabout library in English.
Student: Il libro.
Teacher: Il libro. And what was to give, similar to to do or to make, fare. And then to give was?
Student: Dare.
Teacher: Good so how would you say can you give me the book?
Student: Puoi darmi il libro?
Teacher: Very good, Puoi darmi il libro. So you can use puoi to talk about what somebody can do, whatare their abilities or possibilities and also to kind of make a polite request like here, no? Can yougive me the book, puoi darmi il libro? How would you say your book or the your book.
Student: Il tuo libro.
Teacher: Very good, il tuo libro. Can you give me your book?
Student: Puoi darmi il tuo libro?
Teacher: Good. Puoi darmi il tuo libro. Very good so you could use puoi to make this request or youcould also, a little more colloquially, just say ‘you give me a book?’ with a kind of asking tone ofvoice. What was you give?
Student: Dai.
Teacher: Dai.
Student: Dai.
Teacher: Dai. Good and we said this is used like an expression like come on, dai, come on. So just say canyou give me your book. You can also just say you give me a book?
Student: Mi dai il tuo libro?
Teacher: Very good. Mi dai il tuo libro? Or we could add please if we wanted to: Mi dai il tuo libro perfavore? With this tone of voice that sounds like you’re asking for something. How would you saycan you give me the thing? 
Student: Puoi darmi la cosa?
Teacher: Good. Puoi darmi la cosa? Mi dai la cosa? And your thing, how would your thing be?
Student: La tua cosa.
Teacher: La tua cosa. And and your things?
Student: Le tue cose.
Teacher: Very good, le tue cose. Can you give me your things?
Student: Puoi darmi le tue cose?
Teacher: Good. Puoi darmi le tue cose? Or mi dai le tue cose? If we want to say something like can yougive me it, can you give me them, we’d have two small words in this situation together. We wouldhave mi and lo, or mi and la, or mi and li for the plural, or me and le for the plural feminine. Sowhen we have these two words together mi lo, mi la, mi le, mi li, when they come together we havea slight change in Italian. Mi lo becomes me lo, mi li becomes me li, mi la becomes me la and so onand this is just a sound thing, a phonetic question, a sound question just to make it kind of roll offeasier, no? It’s not about the grammar or meaning, it just happens when two of these little wordscome together. So if you want to say can you give me it we’re going to have mi and lo which meanswe will have me and lo, so can you give me it?
Student: Puoi darmelo?
Teacher: Good. Puoi darmelo? Me lo dai? So could just say, you give me it, me lo dai? What if you weretalking about something feminine?
Student: Me la dai?
Teacher: Me la dai? Puoi darmela? Very good. Can you give me them?
Student: Me li dai?
Teacher: Me li dai? Puoi darmeli? Good. And what if you were talking about feminine things?
Student: Puoi darmele?
Teacher: Puoi darmele? Good. Me le dai?
Student: Me le dai?
Teacher: Can you show me it? Or as we’ve seen we can say can you make me see it? Can you make mesee it? Can you show me it?
Student: Mi puoi fare vederle?
Teacher: So here we have in English, ‘can you make me see it?’ If we break it up, no? But this me and itthey’re going to come together in Italian, no? So we can say: ‘can you make me it to see’?
Student: Me lo fai vedere?
Teacher: Very good. Me lo fai vedere? Or me lo puoi fare vedere? Or we could even have this -meloafter fare. Puoi farmelo vedere?
Student: Puoi farmelo vedere? 
Teacher: So when we have two of these small words together mi becomes me, ti for you becomes te.What was the sound for us?
Student: Ci.
Teacher: Ci. And ci becomes ce. What was to sell?
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere. Very good. The accent at the beginning, which is odd for Italian. It doesn’t happen veryoften but we do have this accent get back in sometimes. Vendere. Are you selling us the house?
Student: Ci vendi la casa?
Teacher: Very good. Ci vendi la casa? Are you selling us the house? Is it you that’s selling us the house?
Student: Tu ci vendi la casa?
Teacher: Tu ci vendi la casa? Good but what if we say, ‘is it you selling us it?’ And it refers to the house.
Student: Tu ce lo vendi?
Teacher: Good, but what if you want it to refer to the house. Instead of lo would have?
Student: Tu ce la vendi?
Teacher: Very good. Tu ce la vendi? Ce la vendi tu? Do you want to sell them to us? So it’s worth notingthat in English we have a certain flexibility: do you want to sell us them? Do you want to sell themto us? But in Italian you’re going to say us them, no? Do you want to sell us them? We have thepersonal sound first, the one referring to the person. So how would that be, do you want to sell usthem?
Student: Voui ce la vendere? Voui ce la venderle?
Teacher: Do you want? So, start with that. Do you want?
Student: Vuoi.
Teacher: Vuoi. To sell them to us?
Student: Ce li vendere.So the position that we can put words like ci or lo, etc. is before the changed verb, no? A verb likevuoi, which is not to want but you want. Or after the to form.
Student: Vuoi vendercela? Vuoi venderceli?
Teacher: Very good, and the accent of vendere stays there, no? Vuoi venderceli? Vuoi venderceli?
Student: Vuoi venderceli?
Teacher: Good, and what you want is, you shouldn’t lose completely the u: vuoi. How would you saywe’re selling you the house.
Student: Ti vendiamo la casa.
Teacher: Very good. Ti vendiamo la casa. And if we’re stressing the word for we, we’re selling you thehouse, the word for we was noi, NOI, noi. So we’re selling you the house.
Student: Noi ti vendiamo la casa. 
Teacher: Very good. Noi ti vendiamo la casa. We’re selling you it and we mean the house?
Student: Noi ti la vendiamo.
Teacher: Good and what happens with ti la?
Student: Te la vendiamo.
Teacher: Good. Noi te la vendiamo.
Student: Noi te la vendiamo.
Teacher: Good. We’re selling you them and still we mean the houses so it’s plural feminine. We’re sellingyou them.
Student: Noi te le vendiamo.
Teacher: Very good. Noi te le vendiamo. Very good. The car, the car is la macchina, which actually justmeans machine. That’s spelled MA - [laughter]. You like that? so that’s spelled MACCHI whichgives us the hard /k/ sound, CHI, /ki/, NA, /na/. La macchina. And it’s a double consonant becausewe have C and then CH so that makes us hang around a little bit on the /k/ sound – la macchina. Orauto, auto, which is also feminine even though it ends in -o because it’s actually just short forautomobile, no? Auto-mobile or automobile in English. So the car la macchina or l’auto becausewhen you get the feminine la followed by a vowel like in auto the ‘a’ of la disappears. So actuallythe car, l’auto, is spelled L apostrophe AUTO. Very good. We can practice this la losing its a withother words that we’ve seen. How would you say the opportunity?
Student: L’opportunità.
Teacher: L’opportunità. But the opportunities here we won’t join them together, the word for the andopportunities. So how would that sound like?
Student: Le opportunità.
Teacher: Very good and the -ità words don’t change for plural even, do they? Le opportunità. TheUniversity?
Student: L’università.
Teacher: Very good, l’università. So la università becomes l’università. But the plural the universities?
Student: Le università.
Teacher: Le università. The opinion? We saw was that words that end in TION they become -zione, butthis is ION, so it would just become -ione.
Student: L’opinione.
Teacher: L’opinione. But the plural the opinions?
Student: Le opinione.
Teacher: What happens to the e on the end to make it plural?
Student: Le opinioni.
Teacher: Very good, le opinioni, good. So when we’re making a noun plural we don’t care about gender,we care how it ends. And we’ve seen that the e on the end will become i in plural, like cane dog, cani dogs; l’opinione the opinion, le opinioni the opinions. How would you say I can’t sell you thecar?
Student: Non posso venderti la macchina.
Teacher: Very good. Non posso venderti la macchina. I can’t sell you my car?
Student: Non posso venderti la mia macchina.
Teacher: Very good, non posso venderti la mia macchina. If you want to say I can’t sell you ‘my one’, youcan just leave that at ‘the my’. So I can’t sell you my one – I can’t sell you the my.
Student: Non posso venderti la mia.
Teacher: Very good. Non posso venderti la mia, in this case referring to something feminine like lamacchina, or l’auto. I can’t sell you it, still referring to the car?
Student: Non posso vendertela.
Teacher: Very good, non posso venderterla. So it’s a bit hard to maintain the accent on VEN-ndere, no?When you’re putting those little words on the end: VEN-dertela. So if you want to get around thatyou can do so just by putting the te la at the beginning. So how would that be?
Student: Non te la posso vendere.
Teacher: Very good. Much easier, no? Non te la posso vendere, non te la posso vendere. Good. Whatwas to do or to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. Can you do it for me? So sometimes you can even like a for implied just by having the meand the it together: we can understand for. Can you do it for me, can you do me it?
Student: Me lo puoi fare?
Teacher: Me lo puoi fare? Puoi farmelo? Can you do it for us? Can you do us it?
Student: Ce lo puoi fare?
Teacher: Ce lo puoi fare? Puoi farcelo? Very good. Kitchen in Italian is cucina, cucina.
Student: Cucina.
Teacher: How is that spelled?
Student: CUCINA.
Teacher: Very good, very good! /chi/, CI. Cucina, CUCINA. And what gender is it?
Student: Feminine.
Teacher: Feminine, no? It ends in an ‘a’ so it looks feminine. So the kitchen would be?
Student: La cucina.
Teacher: La cucina. And the kitchens?
Student: Le cucine.
Teacher: Le cucine. To cook is cucinare. 
Student: Cucinare.
Teacher: So to kitchen! No? To cook, cucinare. How would you say can you cook me the speciality? Canyou cook me the speciality?
Student: Mi puoi cucinare la specialità?
Teacher: Very good! So again here we have for me implied, no? Can you cook for me the speciality? Puoicucinarmi la specialità? Mi puoi cucinare la specialità? How would you say can you cook me itand we mean something feminine, the speciality?
Student: Me la puoi cucinare?
Teacher: Very good. Me la puoi cucinare? Puoi cucinarmela? Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was the word for friend in Italian?
Student: Amico.
Teacher: Amico. Amico would be for a male friend, and how about a female friend?
Student: Amica.
Teacher: Amica. And my friend, female still?
Student: La mia amica.
Teacher: La mia amica, good. And your friend, still female?
Student: La tua – tua amica.
Teacher: La tua amica. And your car?
Student: La tua macchina.
Teacher: La tua macchina or la tua auto. Your cars?
Student: Le tue auto.
Teacher: Good, le tue auto. Auto, we don’t change the last -o to -e or to anything. Why?
Student: Because it’s the short version of automobile.
Teacher: Exactly. Good. So, le tue auto, auto stays the same or if you were to use macchina how would itbe?
Student: Le tue macchine.
Teacher: Very good. Le tue macchine. So generally speaking, to say my or your something we say "themy something", "the your whatever" no? But in some fixed expressions, we don’t do that. Wealready have seen, for example, a casa like to house or home, and then a casa mia, no? We have thehave the possessive word afterwards and we are not saying a la casa mia, just a casa mia. Youmight also be familiar with mamma mia, no? An expression of surprise or disbelief or you know,you can use this in many contexts. Mamma mia, you don’t say la mia mamma, no? So, in somesituations, in some contexts you could see that possessive word afterwards and no word for the, no?But generally speaking, we say the my friend, the your friend. How would you say, can you come tomy house with your friend? So, let’s take it piece by piece. First piece, can you come to my house?
Student: Puoi venire a casa mia?
Teacher: Very good. Puoi venire a casa mia? With your friend. So, how do we find with?
Student: Con.
Teacher: Con, no? We have like in convenient, consequence, with sequence, no? Con, with the your friendand let’s say it’s a masculine friend.
Student: Con il tuo amico. 
Teacher: Good. Puoi venire a casa mia con il tuo amico? Can you come to my house with your friend?So in that sentence we see the two different ways of talking about possession, no? Firstly, we have acasa mia, and this doesn’t happen very often mostly in fixed expressions and then the morestandard way with your friend with the our friend. Con il tuo amico. What was to go, like inandante music?
Student: Andare.
Teacher: Andare. We can go to your house.
Student: Possiamo andare alla casa tua, a casa tua.
Teacher: Good. Possiamo andare a casa tua. How would you say vital in Italian?E: Vitale.
Teacher: No? we have -al ending, so we stick an ‘e’ at the end and get vitale. Life, in Italian, the word forlife is vita. So vital, in English, means what is you know, of life, essential of life, what is vital is oflife. So you might also hear vita mia my life as a term of endearment, no? My life, or even my love,amore mio, again a fixed expression breaking our standard rules for how we deal with possessionin Italian. A casa mia, mamma mia, vita mia. Tell me again how is friend, referring to a female?
Student: Amica.
Teacher: Good, and what’s that in plural?
Student: Amiche.
Teacher: Amiche. So this means friends if we are referring to female friends. And how is that spelled,amice?
Student: AMICHE.
Teacher: Very good. So we have ch maintaining for us the hard /k/ sound that we get in amico and amica,amiche. So in amico and amica we just have CO, CA, but when we have an e after it we need a CHto keep that hard /k/ sound. Friends referring to masculine, male friends, or a mixed group of friendsis amici. How is that spelled?
Student: AMICI.
Teacher: AMICI, no? So there we have the CI giving us the /chi/ sound. So that’s a bit strange, no? For thefeminine we have amiche, we keep the hard /k/ sound but then for the masculine amici, and wekeep the c. My friends, referring to masculine or mixed friends, is i miei amici. I miei amici.
Student: I miei amici.
Teacher: So that gets a bit weird, no? We don’t have mii as we might have mio, mia, mie, mii, we don’t dothat. Italian puts an e between those two i’s to separate them and make them both count, no? So wehave the first i which is the i of mio, mia, mie, no? and the second i which is the i of the plural andto split them up we stick an e in between, so we get i miei MIEI amici.
Student: I miei amici.
Teacher: Good. What was to know?
Student: Conucere, conoscere. 
Teacher: Conoscere. Good. Do want to meet my friends, and we mean masculine or mixed group offriends.
Student: Voui conoscere i mie, il mai, i mai.
Teacher: So, don’t work with sound from memory, think about what we discussed and why it’s weird andhow and how to find it again.
Student: I miei amici.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Vuoi conoscere i miei amici. So, rather than demanding from ourmemory no? we can think about ‘ok, it was strange and I remember it, it was strange and why was itstrange?’ And that will bring us back around to that idea of the e separating those two i’s so that wecan hear them both. Vuoi conoscere i miei amici? What was to see related to video, for example?
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Vedere. Do you want to see my friends? and still we mean a masculine group or mixed goup.
Student: Vuoi vedere i miei amici?
Teacher: Vuoi vedere i miei amici? And what if we meant female friends?
Student: Vuoi vedere le, le, me… le mie amiche.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Ah!
Teacher: So here it’s quite regular no? Quite regular all the way down. Le mie amiche. Vuoi vedere lemie amiche. Do you want to see my ones? And we mean masculine things. But in mixed gender.Do you want to see my ones, do you want to see the my, in plural?
Student: Vuoi vedere i miei?
Teacher: That’s it. Vuoi vedere i miei? So we don’t need to add this word for ones like we do in English,we just say you want to see the my? no? and then we understand my ones. Vuoi vedere i miei? Doyou want to see my ones later?
Student: Vuoi vedere i miei più tardi?
Teacher: Vuoi vedere i miei più tardi? To buy, in Italian is comprare, comprare.
Student: Comprare.
Teacher: COMPRARE. Comprare.
Student: Comprare.
Teacher: I want to buy your house.
Student: Voglio comprare casa tua… la tua casa.
Teacher: So, casa tua would sound more like home. So I want to buy your home. Okay, it’s possible but itdoesn’t as natural as la tua casa, in this case. No? Just your house. Voglio comprare la tua casa. Iwant to buy your one, and we mean the house.
Student: Voglio comprare la tua. 
Teacher: Voglio comprare la tua, no? I want to buy the yours, I want to buy your one. What if we meanta masculine thing?
Student: Voglio comprare il tuo?
Teacher: Very good. Voglio comprare il tuo? Your ones for masculine, your ones for masculine or mixedis i tuoi, tuoi. TUOI.
Student: Tuoi.
Teacher: Tuoi. So again, it is irregular. Now we have tuo, tua, tue, and then tuoi. No tui. Again a bitirregular again for the masculine plural. How would you say I want to invite your friends, I want toinvite your friends? We have invitation, so to find invite is easy.
Student: Invitare.
Teacher: Good. So. I want to invite?
Student: Voglio invitare i tuoi amici.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio invitare i tuoi amici. Again, what was to buy?
Student: Comprare.
Teacher: Comprare. How would you say, I want to buy you it? I want to buy you it?
Student: Te lo voglio comprare.
Teacher: Te lo vuoglio comprare. Voglio comprartelo. And in Italian actually, this could mean either Iwant to buy you it, I want to buy it for you and it could also mean I want to buy it from you, no?Depending on the context, we can have either for you or from you implied. Voglio comprartelo.Te lo vuoglio comprare could mean that I want to buy it for you or I want to buy it from you. Whatis I know, from conoscere?
Student: Io conosc-co... io conosco.
Teacher: Io conosco. Good. So, its SCE and SCI that give us /sheh/ and /shi/ but SCO just /sco/. Conosco.I don’t know your friends. Talking about a mixed or masculine group.
Student: Non conosco i tuoi amici.
Teacher: Very good. Non conosco i tuoi amici. We want to know your friends, we want to meet yourfriends.
Student: Vogliamo conoscere i tuoi amici.
Teacher: Very good. Vogliamo conoscere i tuoi amici. To eat, to eat in Italian is mangiare. Mangiare.
Student: Mangiare.
Teacher: This is spelled MANGIARE and the i is not really pronounced here, is it? Mangiare. It actuallyjust is giving us a soft g, as opposed to a hard /g/. We have seen this before, giorno, the word forday, which is spelled GIORNO or even in specialitá, specialitá, the i more than anything is lettingus know that the c is giving us /ch/. So that happens sometimes in Italian that the i will not be verynoticeable, like here mangiare. Just affecting the previous sound.
Student: Mangiare. 
Teacher: We eat.
Student: Mangiamo.
Teacher: And here even though the i is of -iamo it still just softening that g, so what hear is mangiamo,mangiamo. Let’s eat.
Student: Mangiamo.
Teacher: Mangiamo. Let’s eat. The word for here is qui. QUI, qui, here.
Student: Qui.
Teacher: Let’s eat here.
Student: Mangiamo qui.
Teacher: Mangiamo qui. Do you want to eat here with with my friends? And let’s talk about a mixed ormasculine group of friends. So, do you want to eat here is the first bit.
Student: Vuoi mangiare qui?
Teacher: With my friends.
Student: Con i miei amici.
Teacher: Very good. Vuoi mangiare qui con i miei amici? Very good. And what if you said with myfriends and they were all females?
Student: Vuoi mangiare qui con le mie amiche.
Teacher: Very good. Vuoi mangiare qui con le mie amice. Let’s eat at my house with your friends. Let’seat at my house with your friends.
Student: Mangiamo a casa mia.
Teacher: Let’s it at my house, so then we have ‘a’, also for like at home, no? Mangiamo a casa mia withyour friends.
Student: Con i tuoi amici.Very good. Mangiamo a casa mia con i tuoi amici. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: To pass or to pass by, to pass or to pass by in Italian is passare, passare.
Student: Passare.
Teacher: Passare, PASSARE. Can you pass me the salt? Can you pass me the salt? The salt is il sale.
Student: il sale.
Teacher: Like a saline solution for example, in English. Il sale. Can you pass me the salt?
Student: Puoi passarmi il sale?
Teacher: Good. Puoi passarmi il sale? Well, how else could you ask that?
Student: Mi passi il sale?
Teacher: Very good. Mi passi il sale? So just you pass me the salt. Can you pass me it?
Student: Me lo passi?
Teacher: Very good. So from mi to me just because we have a lo after it, me lo passi? Me lo puoipassare? Very good. What was to eat?
Student: Mangiare.
Teacher: Mangiare. Do you want to eat at my place? Do you want to eat at my house?
Student: Vuoi mangiare a casa mia?
Teacher: Good. Vuoi mangiare a casa mia? Do you want to come to eat at my place? Now, here althoughmangiare is to eat, it is not enough in a sentence like this. When we have a verb of motion in Italian,like venire, no? Can you come to eat at my place, a verb of moving to do something, we need ‘a’ toconnect it to a following verb. The fact that mangiare is to eat isn’t enough here. We want to showthis movement towards eating. So we use the word for to which we know from a casa. What is to?
Student: A.
Teacher: A. So, if you want to say do you want to come to eat at my place we are going to say, ‘do youwant to come to to eat at my place, at my house’. So, how would that be? Start from the beginning.Do you want to come?
Student: Vuoi venire.
Teacher: Vuoi venire. To eat?
Student: A mangiare.
Teacher: At my place?
Student: A casa mia?
Teacher: Good. Vuoi venire a mangiare a casa mia? So although mangiare is to eat and we translate thatas to eat, it’s not enough if it’s following a verb of movement. If we are moving towards eating thenwe will include that movement with ‘a’. What was to speak or to talk connected to fable in English?
Student: Farlare. 
Teacher: Good. and what happened to the "f" it changed to...
Student: Ah, parlare.
Teacher: Parlare. Good. We also have the word for word in Italian is parola which in plural would be...
Student: Parole.
Teacher: Parole, which if you were to read it like an English word, you know this word in English?
Student: Parole.
Teacher: Parole. When someone is released from prison before the sentence is completed, no? And theyon parole, they are on word.
Student: Hmm, ok.
Teacher: But parlare, to speak. How would you say, can you come?
Student: Puoi venire?
Teacher: Puoi venire? Can you come to talk?
Student: Puoi venire a parlare?
Teacher: Good. A parlare. Puoi venire a parlare? Can you pass by to talk with us? For with us we willsay just with we in Italian. So, can you pass by to talk with us, with we?
Student: Puoi passare a parlare con noi?
Teacher: Good, very good. Passare another verb of motion, no? So we, we’re moving towards thattalking and want to show that with ‘a’. Puoi passare a parlare con noi? What was to go?
Student: Andare.
Teacher: Andare. Let’s go?
Student: Andiamo.
Teacher: Andiamo, and you hear this often in Italian. Andiamo, let’s go. Let’s go to eat.
Student: Andiamo a mangiare.
Teacher: Good. Again ‘a’, no? Andare to go towards eating. Andiamo a mangiare. Let’s go to eat. Shallwe go to eat?
Student: Andiamo a mangiare?
Teacher: Andiamo a mangiare? No? Just the tone of voice – ‘andiamo a mangiare?’ We’re going to eat.
Student: Andiamo a mangiare.
Teacher: Andiamo a mangiare. Again, the change is only in the tone of voice. Here we make it sound likea statement. Andiamo a mangiare. And this means that we are going literally, moving, going toeat. It is not used to talk about the future as we do in English, no? In English, we’re going to eat,we’re going to talk, can just be the future but in Italian this means literally, going, moving to dosomething. Andiamo a mangiare. We are going to eat. What was to pass, to pass by?
Student: Passare. 
Teacher: Passare. Shall we pass by?
Student: Passiamo?
Teacher: Passiamo? Should we pass by to see you?
Student: Passiamo a vederti?
Teacher: Good. Passiamo a vederti? Ti passiamo a vedere? Much more common than to see, in this kindof situation, you might hear trovare, which means to find. Shall we pass by to find you? This isvery common in Italian. Trovare.
Student: Trovare.
Teacher: To find. So how you say that, should we pass by to find you?
Student: Passiamo a trovarti?
Teacher: Good. Passiamo a trovarti? We had confermare with firm, to confirm and there very smallchange to fermare, firmare we got to sign. Firmare, to sign.
Student: Firmare.
Teacher: How would you say, I’ll pass by to sign in later.
Student: Passo a firmarlo a più tardi.
Teacher: Good. Passo a firmarlo a più tardi. Lo passo a firmare più tardi. I’ll pass by, I pass by to signit later. Good. So what was to find?
Student: Trovare.
Teacher: Trovare, trovare is to find. How do you say I find?
Student: Trovo.
Teacher: Trovo. I can’t find it or I can’t find him.
Student: Non posso trovarlo.
Teacher: Non posso trovarlo. So this means, you know, I can’t find him or I can’t find it because I ambusy, because something is impeding me or whatever. But you could also just say I don’t find it, Idon’t find him. So how you that be?
Student: Non lo trovo.
Teacher: Non lo trovo. So that means I don’t find him or I don’t find it. How would you say, I don’t findher or I don’t find it, a feminine it?
Student: Non la trovo.
Teacher: Non la trovo. And I don’t find them, a group of females?
Student: Non le trovo.
Teacher: Non le trovo. Can you find it for us? or in Italian can you find us it?
Student: Puoi trovercelo. 
Teacher: Very good, very good. Puoi trovercelo. So that ci lo becames ce lo. Good. Puoi trovercelo. Canyou find us it? We’ll find it for you later, we’ll find it for you later.
Student: Te lo troviamo più tardi.
Teacher: Very good. Te lo troviamo più tardi. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was to know, like to know a person or a city or to get to know?
Student: Conoscere.
Teacher: Conoscere. I know him?
Student: Lo conosco.
Teacher: Lo conosco. I know her?
Student: La conosco.
Teacher: La conosco. I know him well or I know it well. The word for well was bene.
Student: Lo conosco bene.
Teacher: Lo conosco bene. We mentioned that bene we have it in English like in benefit, beneficial,benign. So, lo conosco would mean I know him a person or I know it like a place, like a game, like abook referring to being acquainted with something. How would you say, I don’t know her well or Idon’t know a feminine thing well?
Student: Non la conosco bene.
Teacher: Non la conosco bene. Good. But if you want to say generally, I don’t know, I don’t know whathappened, no I don’t know a piece of information rather than being acquainted with somebody orsomething. I don’t know where he is, for example. Talking about knowing a piece of information,rather than being acquainted with something then there is a verb for to know, which is much moregeneral. This to know, is sapere, sapere.
Student: Sapere.
Teacher: It’s what we have in Homo Sapien, no? The Homo Sapien is the, the wise being. Also like theEnglish slang, if you are familiar with it, he’s got savvy, she’s got savvy, somebody that’s got savvyis smart or street-wise. This is just slang coming from Latin. So we have sapere. SAPERE. A moregeneral verb for to know.
Student: Sapere.
Teacher: So you can listen out when you hear Italian to kind of get a finer tuning for how the two differentverbs sapere and conoscere are used and you can make your own generalisations always remainingopen minded to change any generalisations that you might make if you hear something thatcontradicts them. But generally speaking, we can talk about conoscere for being acquainted withsomebody or something and then sapere for knowing a piece of information. I know, from sapereis so.
Student: So.
Teacher: SO. So.
Student: So. 
Teacher: So, that’s very irregular, no? We just have the ‘s’ from the beginning of sapere and the -o for I.So. When you say, I know, somebody is telling you something, you say, I know. In Italian, you willsay I know it. How would that be?
Student: Lo so.
Teacher: I don’t know.
Student: Non lo so.
Teacher: Non lo so. Good. If, in Italian, if is se, se.
Student: Se.
Teacher: SE. Se. I don’t know if I can come. I don’t know if I am able to come.
Student: Non so se posso venire.
Teacher: Very good. Non so se posso venire. And you didn’t have the lo there. You don’t need it anymore,of course because you’re not saying I don’t know it. You’re saying I don’t know if I can come. Nonso se posso venire. I don’t know if I can pass by to sign it today [laughter]. I don’t know if I canpass by to sign it today. So the first bit is, I don’t know.
Student: Non so.
Teacher: If I can pass by.
Student: Se posso passare.
Teacher: If I can pass by, se posso passare. To sign it.
Student: Firmarlo… A firmarlo.
Teacher: Good. A firmarlo because we have se posso passare a, no? we are moving to that actionpassare a firmarlo, today.
Student: Non so se posso passare a firmarlo oggi.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Non so se posso passare a firmarlo oggi. Very good. I don’t know whyyou don’t want to do it tomorrow. So, I don’t know.
Student: Non so.
Teacher: Why.
Student: Perché.
Teacher: You don’t want to do it tomorrow.
Student: Non lo vuoi fare domani.
Teacher: Very good. Non so perché non lo vuoi fare domani or perché non voi farlo domani. I don’tknow what you want to do.
Student: Non so che cosa vuoi fare.
Teacher: Very good. Non so che cosa vuoi fare. Non so cosa vuoi fare. So you wouldn’t say non conoscohere, no? I don’t know what you want to do, no? Here you would not say non conosco because youare not talking about being acquainted rather than a piece of information, I don’t know what. But you could say for example, non conosco il motivo, no? I’m not acquainted with the reason, themotive why you want to come or whatever, no? You could also say, non so il motivo, I don’t knowthe reason. So there are some gray areas where you could use both verbs and like I said, mostly youwant to listen out to see how Italian use them. So tell me again, what is I know from sapere.
Student: So.
Teacher: So. You know is sai. SAI. Sai.
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Good. Do you know?
Student: Sai?
Teacher: Good. But when it stands alone, just as we had lo so, I know it, if we say do you know we willsay do you know it.
Student: Lo sai?
Teacher: Lo sai? Good. And what if we were to use the word for you?
Student: Tu lo sai?
Teacher: Tu lo sai? Good. Don’t you know it? Don’t you know? Don’t you know it?
Student: Tu non lo sai?
Teacher: Tu non lo sai? Good. Don’t you know if we’re coming? Don’t you know whether we’re coming?So whether or if the same word.
Student: Non sai se veniamo.
Teacher: Very good. Non sai se veniamo. Don’t you whether we’re working tomorrow? What was towork?
Student: Lavorare.
Teacher: Lavorare. Don’t you whether/if we’re working tomorrow?
Student: Non sai se lavoriamo domani.
Teacher: Very good. Non sai se lavoriamo domani. Why don’t you know?
Student: Perché non lo sai.
Teacher: Perché non lo sai. Very good for the lo there. Perché non lo sai. Don’t you know if you cancome to eat tomorrow? Don’t you know if you can come to eat tomorrow?
Student: Non sai se puoi venire a mangiare domani?
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Non sai se puoi venire a magiare domani? Don’t you know if you areable to pass by to speak with us tomorrow? [laughter] So, don’t you know if you are able?
Student: Non sai se puoi...
Teacher: To pass by to speak with us tomorrow?
Student: passare a parlare con noi domani? 
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Don’t you know if you are able to pass by to speak with us tomorrow?Non sai se puoi passare a parlare con noi. With us is just is with we, con noi domani. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: So we had I know, which is?
Student: So.
Teacher: So. Or when we use that by itself – lo so, io lo so. You know.
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. Tu sai, tu lo sai. We know, is more regular going from sapere, we have sappiamo,sappiamo.
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: But we still have a small irregularity. Can you notice it – sapere, sappiamo.
Student: No... Sappiamo.
Teacher: Sapere, sappiamo.
Student: Ah, there’s two P’s, ok.
Teacher: No? We have sapere, we have gliding of the P really quickly, sapere and then sappiamo wedouble the P.
Student: Ah! Ok.
Teacher: So quite a small irregularity, no? But we have it there, extra P. Sappiamo.
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: How would you say, we know?
Student: Lo sappiamo.
Teacher: Lo sappiamo. We know it. We don’t know?
Student: Non lo sappiamo.
Teacher: Non lo sappiamo. We don’t know.
Student: Noi non lo sappiamo.
Teacher: Good. Noi non lo sappiamo. We don’t want to know.
Student: Non vogliamo sapperlo.
Teacher: Good. Non vogliamo sapperlo. Non lo voglio sapere. We want to know if you want to come tospeak with us. We want to know...
Student: Vogliamo sapere...
Teacher: If you want to come to speak with us.
Student: Se vuoi venire a parlare con noi.
Teacher: Very good. Vogliamo sapere se vuoi venire a parlare con noi. Very good. So, to know like insapien, homo sapien is...? 
Student: Sapere.
Teacher: Sapere. And, I know?
Student: So.
Teacher: So, or lo so. You know?
Student: Tu lo sai.
Teacher: Tu sai, or tu lo sai. And, we know?
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: Sappiamo, or lo sappiamo. And then we had conoscere which means to know in the sense to beacquainted with and we can again relate this back to Latin English we mentioned that we hadrecognised, no? when you recognize and you re-conoscere something, no? you reacquaint yourselfwith it. So, being acquainted with people, places, or maybe even ideas, or books, or something likethis. So, from conoscere we have I know.
Student: Conosco.
Teacher: Conosco. And, you know.
Student: Conosci.
Teacher: Conosci. Very good. SCI giving us /shi/. Do you know the city?
Student: Conosci la sittá?
Teacher: Good. Again, how was city?
Student: Cittá.
Teacher: Cittá. Conosci la cittá? No? Do you know the city, do you know the city well?
Student: Conosci bene la cittá?
Teacher: Good. Conosci bene la cittá? Conosci la cittá bene? Do you know the city, we mean are youacquainted with the city? So, we use conoscere. But if we say, for example, do you know how thecity is, this is information and then we would use sapere. Sai, tu sai. The word for how in Italian iscome, come. COME.
Student: Come.
Teacher: So how would you say, do you know how is the city?
Student: Sai come é la cittá?
Teacher: Very good. Sai come é la cittá? and come é would be contracted to com’é. Come é, com’é.
Student: Com’é.
Teacher: Sai com’é la cittá? So if somebody asked you Sai come la cittá? You could say, no! No is thesame word in Italian and so would just pronounced it like Italian – no. No, I don’t know the city.
Student: No, non la conosco. 
Teacher: Good. No, non la conosco. Non conosco la cittá, no? So, somebody could ask you do youknow how it is using sapere and you could respond using conoscere to say no, I’m not acquaintedwith it. I don’t know the city – no, non conosco la cittá. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: When the Italians answer the phone, you will notice that they say pronto. “Pronto?” when theyanswer the phone. And this actually just means ready. Ready? What’s actually is happening there isthat when you answer the phone you are saying I’m ready. Because, traditionally you had anoperator kind of connecting wires from one little box to another and, you know, your ready meansI’m connected so you can hear me. But that’s kind of hung around in Italian. Pronto? So you willsee people using that word when they answer the phone quite a lot. So this actually means ready.Pronto.
Student: Pronto.
Teacher: Tell me again what was I know from sapere.
Student: So.
Teacher: So. I am is io sono. So, sono is I am.
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Good. So you could say I am ready.
Student: Sono pronto.
Teacher: Good, but you being a female you will change pronto. the -o on pronto which refers tosomething masculine you will change it to an -a to refer to you, female.
Student: Sona pronta.
Teacher: Sona pronta. What was to invite.
Student: Invitare.
Teacher: Invitare. Invited, invited is invitato.
Student: Invitato.
Teacher: For masculine. If you say, for example, I am invited, you being a female you won’t say invitatobut…
Student: Invitata.
Teacher: Good. So, I am invited?
Student: Sono invitata.
Teacher: Sono invitata. I don’t know if I’m invited.
Student: Non so se sono invitata.
Teacher: Very good. Non so se sono invitata. What was the word for here?
Student: Qui.
Teacher: Qui. I am here.
Student: Sono qui.
Teacher: Sono qui. What was you know? 
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. Do you know why I am here?
Student: Sai perché sono qui?
Teacher: Good. Sai perché sono qui? So you know is sai, SAI. You are is sei, SEI, sei.
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Are you ready?
Student: Sei pronto?
Teacher: Sei pronto. And what if you are speaking to a female?
Student: Sei pronta?
Teacher: Sei pronta. Are you here?
Student: Sei qui?
Teacher: Sei qui. Do you know if you are here?
Student: Sai se sei qui?
Teacher: Good. Do you know if you are here? Sai se sei qui? [laughter] Sai se sei qui? To interest, tointerest is interessare, interessare.
Student: Interessare.
Teacher: Interested is interessato, interessato.
Student: Interessato.
Teacher: How would you say I am interested.
Student: Sono interessata.
Teacher: Very good. Sono interessata for females or sono interessato for males. Very, the word for veryin Italian is molto, MOLTO. Molto.
Student: Molto.
Teacher: And this is like multiple, of course. Multiple in Latin English is connected with molto in Italianwhich means very. I am very interested.
Student: Sono molto interessata.
Teacher: Good. Sono molto interessata, or interessato for males. I am very interested in the house. Youwill actually say ‘very interested at the house, to the house’ in Italian.
Student: Sono molto interessata alla casa.
Teacher: Good. Sono molto interessata alla casa. I don’t if you are interested in the house, let’s sayyou’re speaking with a male. I don’t know if you are interested in the house.
Student: Non so se sei interassato alla casa. 
Teacher: Very good. Non so se sei – ‘if you are’ – se sei interassato alla casa. So, this you can use like away to solicit more information, no? I don’t know if you are interested in the house, and you kind ofleave it open and lingering. So. what is I know?
Student: So.
Teacher: So. An I am?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. You know?
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. And you are?
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Sei. How was how, you remember?
Student: Come.
Teacher: Come. Good. You don’t know how I am? Like, you don’t know what I am like, no? You don’tknow what I am like, you don’t know how I am.
Student: Non sai come sono.
Teacher: Good. Non sai come sono. But you don’t know me. How would that be? You don't know me.
Student: Non mi conosci.
Teacher: Very good. You went back to conoscere. Non mi conosci, no? Because this means you don’tknow me, you’re not acquainted with me rather than you don’t know what I am like. Very good.You don’t know her, You don’t know her.
Student: Non la conosci.
Teacher: Non la conosci. But if you were to say you don’t know how she is?
Student: Non sai come...
Teacher: How is it is, she is, he is?
Student: È.
Teacher: È.
Student: Ah! Com’é.
Teacher: Very good. They contract, come and é, they will contract together and we get com’é. And it isimportant there to have the open é sound because the -é of comé now is the -é of it is, she is, he is,no? So you don’t know how she is: non sai com’é. So we have seen briefly quando – ‘when’ – andé contracting to quand’é. We have seen cosa and é contracting to cos’é, and now we see come andé contracting to com’é. The word for where in Italian is dove, dove. DOVE.
Student: Dove.
Teacher: How would you say where is he? Where is she? Where is it?
Student: Dov’é. 
Teacher: Very good. Dove é or with that contraction which you guessed. You generalised and you guessedthat might happen, dov’é, and you’re correct. Very good. Dov’é. So, dov’é with the accent on theend and open é all by itself means where is it, where is he, where is she. I don’t know where he is.
Student: Non so dov’é.
Teacher: Non so dov’é. What was the word for how?
Student: Come.
Teacher: So how by itself is come, with the accent on the beginning. Come.
Student: Come.
Teacher: If you say comé it might sound like the contraction of come and é. I don’t know how he is.
Student: Non so com’é.
Teacher: Good. Non so com’é. I don’t know what he is, what he is like. What was the word for when?
Student: Quando.
Teacher: Quando. I don’t know when it is.
Student: Non so quando é.
Teacher: Non so quando é, or with the contraction?
Student: Non so quand’é.
Teacher: Very good. Non so quand’é. I don’t know if he is invited.
Student: Non so se é invitato.
Teacher: Very good. Non so se é invitato. Where are you?
Student: Dove sei?
Teacher: Dove sei. Do you know where you are?
Student: Sai dove sei?
Teacher: Very good. Sai dove sei. Do you know where I am?
Student: Sai dove sono.
Teacher: Good. Sai dove sono. I don’t know where I am.
Student: Non so dove sono.
Teacher: Non so dove sono. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: How would you say sincerity in Italian?
Student: Sincerità.
Teacher: Very good. Sincerità. We have CE there giving us /che/, sincerità. And how do you think youwould say sincere? We don’t have a rule for this but as you know that sincerity becomes sincerità,we can hazard a guess at sincere.
Student: Sincere, Sincero.
Teacher: Good. Sincero, sincero. How would you say he is very sincere, and very is related to multiple.How do you say very in Italian?
Student: Molto.
Teacher: He is very sincere.
Student: È molto sincero.
Teacher: Very good. È molto sincero. If you say she is very sincere, for adjectives ending in -o likesincero, we are going to change this -o to match the feminine gender, no? So she is very sincerewould be?
Student: È molto sincera.
Teacher: Very good. È molto sincera. So just with our adjectives, our describing words, no? Adjectivesare describing words, words we can put ‘is’ in front of: is sincere, she is sincere, she is tall, it isyellow. These are adjectives. So when our adjectives ends with an -o in its standard form, we needto worry about changing it for gender. But not if for example it ends with an ‘e’, no? The word forintelligent is intelligente, intelligente. We have two L’s there and we pronounce them both.
Student: Intelligente.
Teacher: Intelligente. So this adjective ends with an -e so we don’t have to worry the changing for gender.So how would you say ‘she is very intelligent’?
Student: È molto intelligent.
Teacher: Very good. È molto intelligent. How would you say I am sincere?
Student: Sono sincera.
Teacher: Good. Sono sincera, since you’re a female. I would say sono sincero. So what is I am?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: This is also ‘they are’. Sono also means ‘they are’, it’s the same. So how would you say ‘they aresincere’?
Student: Sono sinceri. 
Teacher: Very good, very good. We have to put it into plural, of course. Sono sinceri. And this -i soundwould work for masculine or mixed gender, males and females. But if we were just talking aboutfemales, ‘they are sincere’, how would that be?
Student: Sono sincere.
Teacher: Sono sincere. Very good. How would you say, I am intelligent?
Student: Sono intelligente.
Teacher: Sono intelligente. So it doesn’t matter then if we are male or female, the adjective ends with an -e so we don’t have to worry about changing it. Sono intelligente. How would you say they areintelligent?
Student: Sono intelligente… intelligenti?
Teacher: Which do you think it is?
Student: Intelligenti?
Teacher: But why?
Student: It’s plural.
Teacher: Good. It’s plural. And as we mentioned, these adjectives ending in -e don’t change for gender, sosono intelligenti can refer to males or females – it’s the same. Sono intelligenti. What was theword for where?
Student: Dove.
Teacher: Dove. Good. ‘I don’t know where they are’.
Student: Non so dove sono.
Teacher: Very good. Non so dove sono. ‘I don’t know where I am’.
Student: Non so dove sono.
Teacher: The same, no? Non so dove sono. They are here.
Student: Sono qui.
Teacher: Sono qui. I am here.
Student: Sono qui.
Teacher: Sono qui. So to clarify, we can see io sono qui or when we say it a bit faster /yo/ sono qui. Orwe can say the word for they which is loro. LORO, loro.
Student: Loro.
Teacher: Loro. They. So they are here.
Student: Loro sono qui.
Teacher: Loro sono qui. How is you know from sapere?
Student: Sai. 
Teacher: Good. SAI. Very similar to you are, which is sei, SEI. So tu sai – you know. Do you know wherethey are?
Student: Sai dove sono?
Teacher: And we can add loro to clarify: Tu sai dove sono loro? We just kind of stick it on the end toclarify – tu sai dove sono loro? So I am or they are, how is it?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. And you are?
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Sei. Good. So you are – tu sei. He/she/it is?
Student: È.
Teacher: È. We are is noi, the word for we if we use it, noi siamo, siamo. SIAMO.
Student: Siamo.
Teacher: Noi siamo. I want to know where we are.
Student: Voglio sapere dove siamo.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio sapere dove siamo. Invited was invitato.
Student: Invitato.
Teacher: So, if we go from the verb what we did there to make an adjective to find this adjective invited,that's a describing word word what we can put is in front of or am, ‘I am invited’, ‘he is invited’. Sowhat we do there is we get rid of -are from for example invitare and you put -ato and we find theadjective invitato. Invited.
Student: Invitato.
Teacher: We don't know if we are invited, we don't know if we are invited. How was we know?
Student: Sapiamo?
Teacher: Sappiamo.
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: Good it's slightly irregular, no? we have sapere with one P and then sappiamo with two P's, sowe don't know if we are invited.
Student: Non sappiamo se siamo invitato… invitati.
Teacher: Very good, very good. Non sappiamo se siamo invitati. Very good. Or if we were all femaleswhat would we say instead of se siamo invitati?
Student: Se siamo invitate.
Teacher: Very good. Se siamo invitate. So different types of words behave in different ways, no? With theadjectives we need to worry about changing them for gender if end in -o, but with verbs we don't dothis, no? how is we are?
Student: Siamo. 
Teacher: Siamo. The ending for we is -iamo this doesn't change depending on if we are females or males,no? It's always just siamo. So whilst we don't care a lot about grammatical terminology we do wantto be aware that there are different groups of words, different types of words and different wordsbehave in different ways, words like invitato which are adjectives, no? And they mean or we willchange them for gender and number – invitato, invitada, invitati, invitarte, no? But siamo whichis a verb is always siamo. Non sappiamo se siamo invitati, or invitarte if we are all females. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was to confirm?
Student: Confirmare.
Teacher: Again?
Student: Confirmare.
Teacher: It changes a tiny bit in Italian, the ‘i’ becomes an ‘e’ which actually makes it sound more likeEnglish, no?
Student: Confermare.
Teacher: So if you want to say confirmed, we remove the -are and we put -ato, like interessare. tointerest; interessato, interested. Invitare, to invite; invitato, invited. So we have confermare andthen confirmed?
Student: Confermato.
Teacher: Confermato. How would you say it is confirmed?
Student: È confermato.
Teacher: È confermato. To sign was connected in meaning to confirm, no? And here we actually have the‘i’ like in the English confirm, to sign was firmare, firmare. How would you say it is signed?
Student: È firmato.
Teacher: È firmato. They are signed?
Student: Sono firmato… firmati.
Teacher: Good Sono firmati, no? So we have the adjective there, we need to show the number with theadjective, that it’s plural, firmati. If there were feminine things that were signed, maybe youalready made reference to a certain type of document or paper and it was feminine, you would thatreference with the adjective. So how would that be in feminine, they are signed.
Student: Sono firmate.
Teacher: Sono firmate. Good. So we had sono which is ‘I am’ or ‘they are’, sei which is ‘you are’, siamo‘we are’, and è ‘he/she/it is’, and these all come from the verb ‘to be’. Rather than ‘I be’, we say ‘Iam’; rather than ‘you be’, we say ‘you are’, but it’s quite an irregular verb, no? Am, is, are don’tsound very much like ‘be’. In Italian, it’s also quite irregular as we can see, no? Sono, siamo, è, sei.To be in Italian, so the to form to be is essere, essere.
Student: Essere.
Teacher: That’s spelled ESSERE, essere.
Student: Essere.
Teacher: So we have the accent there three back from the end or at the beginning, in this case. Essere.Like in vendere, to sell, or conoscere, to know. Actually the word interesting in spirit of this,interesting, means something like inter, which is between, and being. To be between being is to get interested or be interested. We also have in English the word essence, no? Essence, essere. Essenceis the being of something in essence in being. So essere, to be. How would you say I have to behere? I must be here?
Student: Devo essere qui.
Teacher: Devo essere qui. Very good. At seven o’clock, at seven o’clock in Italian is alle sette, alle sette.
Student: Alle sette.
Teacher: Alle, which is spelled ALLE is to the. It’s to the for feminine plural. Le is feminine plural. And aand the le of the feminine plural stick together, they contract to form this one word which is alle. Tothe, ALLE. So it gets an extra L, no? Alle. Now the reason that we talk about time in this way, ‘allesette’ – at seven o’clock , is because what we are really saying is ‘at seven hours’, and hour inItalian is ora, ora. How would the plural of that be?
Student: Ore.
Teacher: Ore. So it’s feminine, no? So when we say alle sette we are actually saying at seven hours. ‘Alleora sette’ and sette has two T’s. Sette is like September, in fact the year used to have ten monthshistorically, and September was the seventh month. So how would you say I have to be here atseven o’clock?
Student: Devo essere qui alle sette.
Teacher: Very good. Devo essere qui alle sette. There in Italian is là, LA, là.
Student: Là.
Teacher: I have to be there at seven o’clock.
Student: Devo essere là alle sette.
Teacher: Very good. Devo essere là alle sette. So we said sette is connected to September, no? We chooseit to be the seventh month when our calendar had ten months. October, then, was the eighth month,not the tenth month like now. And eight in Italian is otto. OTTO, otto.
Student: Otto.
Teacher: So we see T with double T, which we have seen before as well. We saw activity, attività, no? Wesaw that happening before. So we have otto like October, meaning eight, and also like octopuswhich eight legs, or octagon, which has eight sides. We must, or we owe, or we have to isdobbiamo, dobbiamo. That’s DOBBIAMO, dobbiamo. It’s a little irregular, no? And again wehave the V to B shift, like devo, devi, but then a B popping up. Dobbiamo.
Student: Dobbiamo.
Teacher: We must be here at eight o’clock.
Student: Dobbiamo essere qui alle otto.
Teacher: Good. Dobbiamo essere qui alle otto. We must be there at eight o’clock.
Student: Dobbiamo essere là alle otto.
Teacher: Good, but take a little bit of time with alle to say al-le and pronounce the two L’s. 
Student: Alle.
Teacher: So all together, we must be here at eight o’clock.
Student: Dobbiamo essere là alle otto.
Teacher: Very good. Dobbiamo essere là alle otto. We want to be there at eight o’clock.
Student: Vogliamo essere là alle otto.
Teacher: Very good. You could also say something like, at eight o’clock tomorrow we’re there.
Student: Dormani alle otto siamo là.
Teacher: Good. Dormani alle otto, or alle otto dormani siamo là. So we had sette like September, ottolike October, nine in Italian is nove like November.
Student: Nove.
Teacher: Ten is dieci.
Student: Dieci.
Teacher: Like December. 

Italian Track - Level: Easy

Teacher: What was to be?
Student: Essere.
Teacher: Essere. We can also use this like a noun. So we said that nouns are words that you put the or a infront of, so il essere, which actually contracts together because essere starts with a vowel, so we getl’essere. Il essere becomes l’essere. L apostrophe essere. So The ‘to be’ what might that mean as anoun? The be what might that be?
Student: The being.
Teacher: The being! Good. The being. How would you saying beings?
Student: Esseri.
Teacher: Esseri. So some words are quite flexible, no? In one situation they are nouns, and in othersituations they are adjectives or verbs, no? How would you say intelligent beings? In Italian we saybeings intelligent.
Student: Esseri intelligenti.
Teacher: Esseri intelligenti. How would you say humanity? And the h here is not going to be pronouncedin Italian.
Student: Umanità.
Teacher: So you could make a good guess at how to say human being.
Student: Essere umano.
Teacher: Good. Essere umano. We have no rule to find umano from human, but as we have umanità, wecould guess that it will be very similar, no? So, umano. How would you say human beings?
Student: Esseri umani.
Teacher: Esseri umani. What was the word for intelligent again?
Student: Intelligente.
Teacher: Intelligente. So there’s actually a rule here. When a word finishes in -ent, or -ant in English,much of the time we can find the Italian just by sticking an -e on the end of the Latin English word,like intelligent to intelligente. So we have different in English, if you want to build that in Italian?
Student: Diferente.
Teacher: Good. And we have two F’s there, no?
Student: Differente. Very good. There you notice it sounds more Italian when you put that double F,differente. It also helps you have that Italian intonation. Italian feels quite sung, as a language. Anda lot of the time it’s the double consonants that kind of holds back the tension that’s releasedafterwards that makes it much more sung – differente. Indifferent?
Student: Indifferente.
Teacher: Indifferente. Important? 
Student: Importante.
Teacher: Importante. How would you say, she is different?
Student: È differente.
Teacher: È differente. So an adjective ending in -e we don’t have to worry about changing it for gender.But we do change it for plural. So if we say, We are different?
Student: Siamo differenti.
Teacher: Siamo differenti, no? And this works for males or females. Siamo differenti. We saw like inEnglish when we have de- like in demonstrate, this is of or from in Italian. And how is this de- inItalian?
Student: Di.
Teacher: Di. Good. So if you want to say independent, apart from the -e on the end, we might have tomake another little change, no?
Student: Indipente… indipente?
Teacher: Good but you are missing a syllable no?
Student: Indipendente.
Teacher: Very good. Indipendente, no? So the de become a di in Italian. Indipendente. How would yousay dependent.
Student: Dipendente.
Teacher: Dipendente. Dipendente actually means of hanging, no? And indipendente means like not ofhanging. So when you are dependent you are hanging of or from somebody or something else.Actually it’s the same in German, no? How do you say in German?
Student: Abhängig.
Teacher: Abhängig, no? The verb to depend, abhängig – hanging, no? Hanging. You can actually get rid ofthe di also from dipendente to get the word hanging, how would that be?
Student: Pendente.
Teacher: Pendente. And this is how The Leaning Tower of Pisa is called. Torre, which is Tower in Italian,torre pendente di Pisa, no? It’s like a pendulum, if you look at the angle of the tower. How wouldyou say we are independent?
Student: Siamo indipendente… indipendenti.Very good. Indipendenti. Siamo indipendente. Let’s be independent.
Student: Siamo indipendenti.
Teacher: Good we will just have to change the voice, no? Siamo indipendenti. Let’s be independent.What was interesting?
Student: Interessante.
Teacher: Interessante. We are interesting. 
Student: Siamo interessanti.
Teacher: Siamo interessanti. Good. But we are interested?
Student: Siamo interessati.
Teacher: Siamo interessati. And as this interessato ends with an -o, we also change the gender, so if weare all females when we say we are interested, how would that be?
Student: Siamo interessate.
Teacher: Siamo interessate, no? So to get interested we’ve gone from to interest, interessare, remove the-are, and add -ato. Interessare – interessato. We can also think we are going from interessare toget interessante, no? Interesting. From interessare we remove -are and put -ante, no? Which alsomeans we can work backwards from those other adjectives that we found just by adding E’s ontothe Latin English, important – importante, to find verbs in Italian. For example, importante, if wethink of moving between -ante and -are, how would we get the verb to import?
Student: Importare.
Teacher: Importare. Important?
Student: Importante.
Teacher: Importante. And imported?
Student: Importato.
Teacher: Importato. So there are potentially two different adjectives you can get from every single verbas long as it makes sense to build them. What was different?
Student: Differente.
Teacher: Differente. So we found this by adding an -e onto the Latin English different, differente, no?But we could have also gone from the verb to differ, no? Which is differire. We could haveremoved the -ire and put -ente in the same way. So like I said we can potentially get two differenttypes of adjectives quite easily from verbs in Italian. We have frustration in English. So wouldwould you say to frustrate?
Student: Frustrare.
Teacher: Frustrare. How would you say frustrated?
Student: Frustrato.
Teacher: Frustrato. And how would you say frustrating? Like interesting?
Student: Frustrante
Teacher: Frustrante, no? So we get two adjectives there from frustrare. But it also means that maybe ifyou come across, for example, one of the adjectives before you ever come across the verb, you canalso work backwards and find the verb, no? So if you find somewhere frustrato or frustrante, youcan work out yourself that frustrare is the verb and you can use that, ‘to frustrate’. How would yousay ‘They are important?’
Student: Sono importanti. 
Teacher: Good. Sono importanti. Or with the word for they, loro sono importanti. And how would yousay they are imported?
Student: Sono importati.
Teacher: Sono importati, no? Or what if you were talking about feminine objects?
Student: Sono importate.
Teacher: Good. Sono importate. Loro sono importate. They are frustrated.
Student: Sono frustrati.
Teacher: Sono frustrati, if we refer to males or mixed groups, or just females?
Student: Sono frustrate.
Teacher: Sono frustrate. And they are frustrating?
Student: Sono frustranti.
Teacher: Very good. Sono frustranti. So we’re changing frustrante to get the plural, and that works forboth genders. Sono frustranti. So you can move between words in Italian when you find oneversion, be it the adjective or the verb you can think of the others and especially in a live contextwhen you are practising and trying to express yourself you will realise how many different wordsyou can access that you may never have used before. How would you say it’s a frustratingsituation? Give it a try, it’s a frustrating situation.
Student: È una situazione frustrante.Very good. è una situazione frustrante. We saw before that the words ending -ione are feminine,so we have una situazione frustrante, frustrante doesn’t change for gender. Very good. È unasituazione frustrante. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to import?
Student: Importare.
Teacher: And important?
Student: Importante.
Teacher: Importante, no? So we can think of going from the Latin English important and adding an -eimportante or we can also think that we are going from the verb importare, removing the -are andputting an -ante, importante. And imported?
Student: Importato.
Teacher: Importato. So we go from importare, removing the -are there, and we get -ato for a differenttype of adjective. Imported – importato, rather than important. Importante. How would you say tocontaminate? We have contamination in English.
Student: Contaminare.
Teacher: Contaminare. And if we want to say contaminated?
Student: Contaminato.
Teacher: Contaminato. How would you say contaminating? Like, you know, a contaminating factory, forexample.
Student: Contaminante.
Teacher: Contaminante. Good. So to get our -ato adjective we spoke about removing the -are and putting-ato, like contaminare – contaminato. For verbs ending in -ire, we add -ito for this adjective. Sowhat was to understand, which was related to head, which we have in capital?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: Capire. How would you say understood?
Student: Capito.
Teacher: Capito. Which you can hear a lot in Italian. Capito. Actually we even use it in English, inEnglish slang you can hear capito! or capito. So that just means understood. Which is not an -edadjective in English but only because it is a bit irregular in English rather than ‘understanded’, wesay understood in English, but that shouldn’t confuse us it’s an English problem. Understood –capito. To finish was finire, finire.
Student: Finire.
Teacher: How would you say finished?
Student: Finito.
Teacher: Finito. It’s finished.
Student: È finito. 
Teacher: È finito. They are finished.
Student: Sono finiti.
Teacher: Sono finiti. To clean in Italian is pulire.
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: Which is related to polish. Pulire. PULIRE, to clean.
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: How would you say we’ll clean it tomorrow? We’ll clean it tomorrow.
Student: Lo puliamo dormani.
Teacher: Lo puliamo dormani. And how would you say cleaned? So getting the adjective, it’s cleaned, orjust clean.
Student: Pulito.
Teacher: Pulito. So it is clean?
Student: È pulito.
Teacher: È pulito. They are very clean.
Student: Sono molto puliti.
Teacher: Sono molto puliti, or for feminine things: pulite. To organise was organizzare, with two Z’s,organizzare.
Student: Organizzare.
Teacher: How would you say organised?
Student: Organizzato.
Teacher: Organizzato. It is organised?
Student: È organizzato.
Teacher: She is very organised.
Student: È molto organizzata.
Teacher: Very good. È molto organizzata. So we have -ato for -are verbs, to make this adjective, -ito for -ire verbs, and for -ere verbs it gets a little bit odd. We have -uto, -uto.
Student: Uto.
Teacher: So what was to sell?
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere. And sold would be?
Student: Venduto.
Teacher: Venduto. They are sold?
Student: Sono venduti. 
Teacher: Sono venduti. It is sold?
Student: È venduto.
Teacher: It is sold. È venduto. Or if we’re talking about a feminine thing, like la macchina, the car?
Student: La macchina è venduta.
Teacher: Good. È venduta. La macchina è venduta. What was to know, as to our cognise know, ratherthan sapere?
Student: Conoscere.
Teacher: Conoscere. If you want to get known, so again, it’s irregular in English, we don’t say know-ed,no? ‘Very well know-ed’, we say, very well known in English, so to get that, we going to removeour -ere and put -uto.
Student: Conosciuto.
Teacher: Conosciuto. Good. And this is spelled CONOSCIUTO. And the ‘i’ there isn’t pronounced, it’sjust showing us that the SC gives us the /sh/ sound, conosciuto. You can say for example, it is wellknown, it is very known.
Student: È molto conosciuto.
Teacher: È molto conosciuto, or famoso – famous, it would mean the same. È molto conosciuto. Or this-ato, or -ito, or -uto adjective that we learn to build, we can actually use this very same form to gointo the past, just as we do in English. In English, we can say, ‘it is sold’, or ‘I have sold’ or ‘I havesold it’. We can say ‘it is understood’, there we have an adjective, and then ‘I have understood’. Weuse it like a verb, the going into the past. We do the same in Italian. So give me again to understand.
Student: Conosce…
Teacher: Related to head.
Student: Capire.
Teacher: Capire. And understood.
Student: Capito.
Teacher: Capito. So we could use this like an adjective, we can say è capito – it is understood, or wecould also say I have understood and there we are talking about the past, no? ‘I have understood.’So for this one we need to learn I have. I have in Italian is just ho.
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho, just ho. And this is spelled HO. And this H is silent, like we saw in umanità, no? HO, ho.
Student: Ho.
Teacher: So if you want to say I have understood, it’s quite literal: I have understood.
Student: Ho capito.
Teacher: Ho capito. I have understood you.
Student: Ti ho capito. 
Teacher: Very good. Ti ho capito. We said that the little words like ti or lo or la or mi can go before thechanged verb or after the to form. We don’t have any to form here so there’s only one place we canput it. Ti ho capito. I haven’t understood.
Student: Non ho capito.
Teacher: Non ho capito. I have sold the house.
Student: Ho venduto la casa.
Teacher: Very good, with the -ere verbs we get -uto to get this version. Good. Ho venduto la casa. Ihaven’t sold the house.
Student: Non ho venduto la casa.
Teacher: Non ho venduto la casa. I have organised everything. The word for everything is tutto.
Student: Tutto.
Teacher: TUTTO. You might know this from Tutti Fruti, the name of sweet flavour or a drink flavourwhich just literally means all the fruits. So multi-flavoured. Tutto – everything. So I have organisedeverything.
Student: Ho organizzato tutto.
Teacher: Very good. Ho organizzato tutto. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to organise again?
Student: Organizzare.
Teacher: And organised?
Student: Organizzato.
Teacher: and we've seen how this form, organizzato, we can use it like an adjective to say something isorganised, or we can use it like a verb to say I have organised to talk about the past. How would yousay i have organised the visit? The visit is la visita, la visita.
Student: Ho organizzato la visita.
Teacher: Ho organizzato la visita. I have organised my visit? The my visit.
Student: Ho organizzato la mia visita.
Teacher: Very good. Ho organizzato la mia visita. What was i know from sapere? It was veryirregular.
Student: So.
Teacher: And I have?
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho. HO. So these actually share an irregularity. It's not very obvious when we hear them becausewe have SO giving us so, and then HO and the H is silent, no? But so and ho share an irregularity.What was you know?
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. SAI. Sai. If you want to say you have, the irregularity is again shared so we haveso and ho, and sai and how would you say you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. Hai. Have you organised your visit?
Student: Hai organizzato la tua visita.
Teacher: Hai organizzato la tua visita. Very good. Have you organised everything for your visit? Haveyou organised everything for your visit?
Student: Hai organizzato tutto per la tua visita.
Teacher: Very good. Hai organizzato tutto per la tua visita. Have you understood?
Student: Hai capito.
Teacher: Hai capito. Have you understood me?
Student: Mi hai capito.
Teacher: Mi hai capito. What was to sell? 
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: And sold?
Student: Venduto.
Teacher: Have you sold the things?
Student: Hai venduto le cose?
Teacher: Have you sold your things?
Student: Hai venduto le tue cose?
Teacher: Very good. Hai venduto le tue cose? What was to come, like in convenient, souvenir, adventure?
Student: Venire.
Teacher: Venire. We come?
Student: Veniamo.
Teacher: Veniamo. We are coming to eat or we come to eat?
Student: Veniamo a mangiare.
Teacher: Veniamo a mangiare. So good. When we have a verb of motion like venire – to come, andare– to go, passare – to pass, and we join that to another verb we use ‘a’ to show that movement.Veniamo a mangiare. How would you say ‘I have eaten’.
Student: Ho mangiato.
Teacher: So again we don't hear that ‘i’, that ‘i’ is just softening the ‘g’. Ho mangiato.
Student: Ho mangiato.
Teacher: Good. Venire becomes venuto which is strange, why is it strange?
Student: Because it ends in -ire?
Teacher: Good, exactly it should be venito, no? But it's not, it's venuto. Maybe once upon a time it wasvenere and this is why we have venuto, I'm not sure but it's irregular. But that's easy to rememberbecause we also have welcome which is benvenuto, no? So that will remind us of this strangeirregularity that instead of venito we have venuto for venire. What was to be?
Student: Essere.
Teacher: Essere. Like in interest, or essence. And from to be, we have I am.
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. Io sono. They are.
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. Or loro sono. You are.
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Sei. Tu sei. And we are? 
Student: Siamo.
Teacher: Siamo. Or noi siamo. And he/she/it is?
Student: È.
Teacher: In Italian, when you talk about the past in this way, ‘I have sold’, ‘I have come’, you need tocheck what type of verb you are using. For example, if you are using a verb of movement, no? Likethe ones that have ‘a’ after them when they join to another verb, like venire – ‘veniamo amangiare’, parlare, or whatever. You don't make this past with to have but with to be. So if youwant to say ‘I have come’, you say ‘I am come’. Instead of ‘I have gone’ you say ‘I am gone’.Instead of ‘I have arrived’, ‘I am arrived’. And this was also once the case in English, which is why‘I am come’ makes perfect sense, just sounds really antiquated, formal, or even a bit funny inEnglish. So this used to be the case in English before it's simplified in English but it's still verymuch the case in Italian. So in Italian when we use this kind of past we need to think about – am Iusing a verb of motion and if we are, then we're going to go into the past with to be: I am comerather than I have come. What was I am again?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. So if you want to say I have come, you will say I am come, how is that?
Student: Sono venuto.
Teacher: And here when you use venuto with to be, it behaves like an adjective again. So you as a femalewon't say sono venuto, but…
Student: Sono venuta.
Teacher: What was to go?
Student: Andare.
Teacher: Andare. We saw that we had andante as a musical speed, no? If you want to say I have goneyou will say I am gone.
Student: Sono andata.
Teacher: Good, you as a female – sono andata. I have come to speak.
Student: Sono andata…
Teacher: Come.
Student: Sono venuta a parlare.
Teacher: A parlare, no? We connect with ‘a’. How was you are?
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Sei. Good. Have you come, are you come?
Student: Sei venuto?
Teacher: Sei venuto to a male, and what if you are speaking to a female, have you come?
Student: Sei venuta? 
Teacher: Sei venuta? Have you gone?
Student: Sei andato?
Teacher: Sei andato? Sei andata? Have they come? Are they come?
Student: Sono venuti?
Teacher: And for females?
Student: Sono venute?
Teacher: So when we're using these adjectives / verb forms, no? With to be we’re going to behave likeadjectives, no? But when we use them with to have, so if you say for example, ‘I have spoken’, ‘wehave to speak’, parlare, spoken would be?
Student: Parlato.
Teacher: And i have spoken?
Student: Ho parlato.
Teacher: Ho parlato. The ending doesn’t matter if you are male or female. Parlato is parlato. Hoparlato. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: To arrive in Italian is arrivare, arrivare.
Student: Arrivare.
Teacher: So here we have two R’s, giving us the rolling R. Arrivare.
Student: Arrivare.
Teacher: It’s hard for you?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Ok, so think about it literally as two R’s. So say R.
Student: R.
Teacher: And then start the next R, but having kind of let your tongue fold into the previous one, so a/rr/i.
Student: A/rr/i.
Teacher: Good, but without the tension that comes in that moment, because that tense the tongue, and thetongue has to flip quite naturally, so it needs to be very relaxed. So first make RRR.
Student: RR.
Teacher: You can feel the little flick it makes when you say RR, or the fold it makes when the tonguerelaxes. The flicking sound is actually letting your tongue relax and fold there and then activating itthere for the next R. A/rr/i.
Student: A/rr/i.
Teacher: Good. It’s basically that but the more relaxed you get the more your tongue will flick there.Arrivare.
Student: Arrivare.
Teacher: Good. And arrived?
Student: Arrivato.
Teacher: Arrivato. So if you say I have arrived, how might it be in Italian?
Student: Sono arrivata.
Teacher: Good. Sono arrivata. Sono arrivato. So here we have a verb of movement, of motion, so ratherthan I have arrived, we say I am arrived, Sono arrivato, and in your case, sono arrivata, becausewhen we use this with to be, it’s going to behave like an adjective, so we have to think about that aswell. What is you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. Have you arrived?
Student: Sei arrivato?
Teacher: Sei arrivato? Or if you’re talking to a female?
Student: Sei arrivata? 
Teacher: Sei arrivata? Have they arrived?
Student: Sono arrivati?
Teacher: Sono arrivati? Or for females.
Student: Sono arrivate?
Teacher: Sono arrivate? What was to buy?
Student: Comprare.
Teacher: Comprare. I have bought.
Student: Ho comprato.
Teacher: Good. Ho. Ho comprato. So to buy is not a verb showing movement and direction, so we goback to I have, and it also means we don’t need to worry about changing it to match our gender. Hocomprato. I have bought the books?
Student: Ho comprato i libri.
Teacher: Good. Ho comprato i libri. Good. This might also be very common, ‘I have bought the books’,to just say ‘I bought the books’. It might depend on the dialect of Italian but generally speaking inspoken Italian, it is extremely common to use this ‘I have’ past where we might use the simple pastin English ‘I bought’. For example, in Italian you can say ‘I have bought the books yesterday’,which would sound a little bit weird in English. In English, we would much strongly prefer ‘Ibought the books yesterday’. But in Italian there’s much more of a grey area and the ‘have’ past aswe would call it, or ‘have be’ past is used much more than in English. The word for yesterday inItalian, is ieri, ieri.
Student: Ieri.
Teacher: IERI. And it’s like the beginning of yesterday, and it’s actually related to yesterday. Ieri.
Student: Ieri.
Teacher: I arrived yesterday.
Student: Sono arrivata ieri.
Teacher: Good. Sono arrivata ieri. Sono arrivato ieri. Have you arrived yesterday? So that would sounda bit weird in English, no? Have you arrived yesterday. But in Italian it’s perfectly fine, it’s going tofeel like did you arrive yesterday.
Student: Sei arrivato ieri.
Teacher: Good. Sei arrivato ieri. Are you arrived yesterday. Or if you’re talking to a female?
Student: Sei arrivata ieri.
Teacher: Very good. Did you come yesterday?
Student: Sei venuto ieri?
Teacher: Have you bought the car yesterday? Did you buy the car yesterday?
Student: Hai comprato la macchina ieri? 
Teacher: Very good. Hai comprato la macchina/l’auto ieri? Good. So they all went back to have. Whatwas to pass by?
Student: Passare.
Teacher: Passare. Have you passed by to speak with them? For with them, we just going to say with theyin Italian. So having passed by to speak with them?
Student: Sei passato a parlare con noi…
Teacher: They.
Student: con ci.
Teacher: Think about sono, io sono, and they are?
Student: Ah! Con loro.
Teacher: Very good. Have you passed by to speak with them? Sei passato a parlare con loro. And howwould you just say: have you spoken with them?
Student: Hai parlato con loro?
Teacher: Very good. Very good. So we go back to using have because we’re not using a verb of movementand motion, no? Hai parlato con loro? So we had I know from sapere. How was that?
Student: So.
Teacher: So. And I have?
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho. And we said these share an irregularity, in fact. We have SO and HO. We had you know fromsapere, which was?
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. And then you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. Again sharing that irregularity, SAI to HAI. What was we know from sapere?
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: Sappiamo. We have is abbiamo, very similar, we have two B’s. We have two P’s in sappiamo,we know. Abbiamo, two B’s.
Student: Abbiamo.
Teacher: How would you say we have sold the house?
Student: Abbiamo venduto la casa.
Teacher: Abbiamo venduto la casa. We have come. We are come.
Student: Siamo venuti.
Teacher: Siamo venuti. How would you say: We have come to speak.
Student: Siamo venuti a parlare. 
Teacher: Good. Siamo venuti a parlare. How would you say: They have gone to eat? So, what was to go?
Student: Andare.
Teacher: Good. They have gone to eat?
Student: Sono andati a mangiare.
Teacher: Sono andati a mangiare, or for females, sono andate a mangiare. What was to visit?
Student: Visitare.
Teacher: Visitare. And university?
Student: Università.
Teacher: Università. And the university.
Student: La… L’università.
Teacher: Very good. They stick together, no? L’università. Spelled L apostrophe then we writeuniversità. We have visited the university yesterday. We visited the university yesterday.
Student: Abbiamo visitato l'università ieri.
Teacher: Very good. Abbiamo visitato l'università ieri. Now you would be forgiven for thinking to useto be here. Visited is moving, no? When you visit someone, you go to visit them. But if you thinklike that it will be very blurry, which verbs refer to movement, and which don’t. Because a lot ofverbs necessarily involve some movement. Only if the verb is referring specifically to themovement, like passare, venire, andare, do we use to be in the past. So for example, to drive inItalian is guidare, guidare. GUIDARE. Guidare.
Student: Guidare.
Teacher: Of course related to guide, no? When you drive a car you guide it. And this verb actually refers tothe act of controlling the car. Rather than actually going in a car. So hear to say I have driven, wewon’t say I am driven, we will use the verb to have.
Student: Ho guidato.
Teacher: Ho guidato. And in fact we have another verb to say to go in the car, to refer actually to movingin the car, and that’s andare in auto, or andare in macchina. So if you want to say we have driven,specifically, how is that?
Student: Abbiamo guidato.
Teacher: Abbiamo guidato. But if you want to say we have gone in car.
Student: Siamo andati in macchina.
Teacher: Good. Siamo andati or siamo andate in macchina. What was to clean, like to polish?
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: Pulire. Have you cleaned the car?
Student: Hai pulito la macchina?
Teacher: Good. Hai pulito la macchina? We have cleaned the car. 
Student: Abbiamo pulito la macchina.
Teacher: Abbiamo pulito la macchina. We haven’t cleaned the car yet. The word for yet is ancora.
Student: Ancora.
Teacher: Which means again or another time. Ancora. And you can use this like yet, but you must put itafter we have it. So you will say we haven’t yet cleaned the car.
Student: Non abbiamo ancora pulito la macchina.
Teacher: Good. And you can say ‘but we have cleaned the house’. The word for but is ma. MA. But wehave cleaned the house.
Student: Ma abbiamo pulito la casa.
Teacher: Good. Ma abbiamo pulito la casa. Tutta la casa is all the house, the whole house. Tutta lacasa.
Student: Tutta la casa.
Teacher: We have cleaned all the house, so we have cleaned the whole house.
Student: Abbiamo pulito tutta la casa.
Teacher: Abbiamo pulito tutta la casa. We have cleaned all the houses, how do you think that might be?Rather than all the house or the whole house, all the houses, we have cleaned all the houses?
Student: Abbiama pulito tutte le case.
Teacher: Very good. Abbiama pulito tutte le case. We haven’t cleaned all the houses yet. We haven’t yetcleaned all the houses.
Student: Non abbiamo ancora pulito tutte le case. Have you cleaned all the cars? Have you cleaned allthe cars?
Student: Hai pulito tutte le macchine?
Teacher: Good. Hai pulito tutte le macchine? And have you cleaned the whole car?
Student: Hai pulito tutta la macchina?
Teacher: Very good. Hai pulito tutta la macchina? Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: How was to clean? Related to polish?
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: And cleaned, from clean?
Student: Pulito.
Teacher: Good. If you say I have cleaned it, I have clean it, what is the word for it?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo. Lo and ho are going to contract together to form l’ho. Which is spelled L apostrophe HO. Soit sounds just like it – lo – by itself, no? Lo. But it’s actually ‘lo ho’. So if you say for example, Ihave cleaned it?
Student: L’ho pulito.
Teacher: L’ho pulito. Good. So this is I have cleaned it. I have bought it?
Student: L’ho comprato.
Teacher: Good. L’ho comprato. So lo there is lo ho contracted. L apostrophe HO. So, lo and ho contractto form l’ho. And la and ho also contract to form l’ho. So if you say for example, I have bought it,and you mean a feminine thing, you’ll also start l’ho, this is just a contraction of la and ho. Butthere is another way of knowing that we mean la instead of lo. We saw when we use the past to be,we have to match the -ato/ito/uto, the person coming or going or whatever. When we make thishave past, this -ato/ito/uto past and we have either lo, la, li, or le. So when we make this have pastusing to have, and we have lo, la, li, or le, it also changes the -ato/ito/uto will also change in thiscircumstance to match our lo, our la, our li, or our le. So if we say for example, I have bought it,and we mean something masculine, lo comprato, we have -ato. But if we say I have bought it, andwe mean something feminine, you will change the -ato to match that.
Student: L’ho comprata.
Teacher: L’ho comprata. Good. We don’t see the feminine in the first bit, l’ho, because la ho contracts tol’ho, but we see it in comprata. L’ho comprata. So what the sound for it?
Student: Lo.
Teacher: Lo for masculine, or for neuter, for something that doesn’t have a gender we have lo. And howdo we make that plural, to get them? Lo becomes?
Student: Li.
Teacher: Li. Good. And li doesn’t contract with ho. Only lo ho contract to l’ho, and la ho contract to l’ho,but li won’t contract. So if you say I have bought them?
Student: Li ho comprati.
Teacher: Very good. Li ho comprati. So because we have lo, la, li, le, we have to change our -ato ofcomprato to match it. Li ho comprati. And if we are talking about feminine things – I have boughtthem? 
Student: Le ho comprate.
Teacher: Le ho comprate. What is you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. You have. Tu hai. Have you bought them?
Student: Li hai comprati.
Teacher: Li hai comprati. Have you bought them and we mean feminine things?
Student: Le hai comprate.
Teacher: Very good. Le hai comprate. Very good. So we have seen two times that we need to match our -ato/ito/uto forming this past, when we use to be to form the past, and we need to match it towhoever is coming or going, so you know, if I say ‘I have come’, I say sono venuto, and you saysono venuta as a female. So when you use to be we have to match this -ato/ito/uto to the personthat is coming or going or whatever, and when we use to have in the past, we need to match the -ato, -uto, or -ito if we have a little word like lo, la, li, or le. Already in Italian, already, is già, già.
Student: Già.
Teacher: that’s GIA. Già.
Student: Già.
Teacher: So the ‘i’ here is actually just making the ‘g’ soft, you don’t hear the ‘i’ apart from that, it’s justgiving us a /j/ sound instead of a /g/ sound. We’ve seen quite a few examples of this alreadypopping up, I think the most famous example would be the word ciao. The word ciao is spelledCIAO, and the CI there is just giving us a /ch/, we don’t really have a value for the ‘i’, otherwiseciao. So the same in già, GIA. And that means already, and already in Italian comes after have. Soif we say for example, have you bought it already? We will say, have you already bought it? So howwill be that – have you already bought it?
Student: Lo hai già comprato?
Teacher: Good. And what might happen to lo hai? So we had lo ho contracting to l’ho…
Student: L’hai già comprato.
Teacher: Good. L’hai già comprato. Have you bought them already?
Student: Li hai già comprati?
Teacher: Very good. Li hai già comprati? Good. What was to sell?
Student: Ven-der-e.
Teacher: Vendere.
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: So we had the accent third back from the end on this one. Vendere.
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: And sold? 
Student: Venduto.
Teacher: So the accent being third from the end on vendere, on the to form of the verb doesn’t affectvenduto, we still have the accent there on -uto, venduto. So how would you say, have you sold italready? Have you already sold it?
Student: L’hai già venduto?
Teacher: L’hai già venduto? Good. So here it’s actually agreeing, because we have lo and hai contractingtogether to make l’hai, and venduto already in the masculine singular is agreeing with that lo. Butif you were to say have you sold it already, and you mean the house, a feminine thing – have yousold it already?
Student: L’hai già venduta?
Teacher: Very good. L’hai già venduta? So when we have lo/la/li/le, the -ato/ito/uto matches it. What wasto understand?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: Capire, no? Understood?
Student: Capito.
Teacher: Capito. How would you say I have understood him?
Student: Lo hai… L’ho capito.
Teacher: L’ho capito. L’ho in that sound /lo/ we have the information of it or him, and also ho, I have, allthere contracted together, l’ho. L apostrophe HO capito. So only because of the -o in capito weunderstand we’re talking about a masculine person or just it, but if we were to say, I haveunderstood her?
Student: L’ho capita.
Teacher: L’ho capita. So la ho contracts to form the same sound, l’ho. L apostrophe HO. So only thenwith the -a in capita do we understand that we’re referring to a female. L’ho capita, I haveunderstood her. I have understood them?
Student: Li ho capiti.
Teacher: Good. So we don’t have the contraction there with the plural. Li ho capiti. And if we are talkingabout females, I have understood them?
Student: Le ho capite.
Teacher: Good. Le ho capite. Good. So with lo, la, li, we have to match. And as we’ve seen previously,we don’t use the little words like lo, la, and we use the noun, we don’t need to match anything. So,for example, I haven’t understood your friends, and we say ‘your friends’ rather than ‘them’, wedon’t have to worry about matching anything. So how would you say that – I haven’t understoodyour friends, the your friends.
Student: Non ho capito le tua amici.
Teacher: Again? The your friends?
Student: Le tua amici. 
Teacher: There’s a bit of a mix, because there’s mostly, you’re using a memory, no?
Student: I tuoi amici.
Teacher: I tuoi, tuoi. TUOI, It’s a bit irregular, amici. So all together, I haven’t understood your friends?
Student: Non ho capito i tuoi amici.
Teacher: Good. Non ho capito i tuoi amici. So because we are saying i tuoi amici, your friends, we’renot saying them, we’re not using this little word to say them or him or it, we don’t need to worryabout changing ‘capito’. But if we say, I didn’t understand them, I haven’t understood them, thenwe do. So how would that be?
Student: Non li ho capiti.
Teacher: Bravo. Non li ho capiti. So there we have capiti matching li. What was to sell?
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere. Sold?
Student: Venduto.
Teacher: Venduto. I have sold the house?
Student: Ho venduto la casa.
Teacher: Ho venduto la casa. So we have no matching. We have -uto and la casa. No need to match it.But if you say ‘I have sold it’, and we mean the house?
Student: L’ho venduta.
Teacher: L’ho venduta. This is la ho contracted, l’ho venduta – I have sold it. What was to come?
Student: Venire.
Teacher: Venire. And come like in I have come, welcome, benvenuto?
Student: Venuto.
Teacher: Venuto. Good. Venuto. So also when we use this past with to be, this -ato/uto/ito past with tobe, like with our verbs of movement, it matches whoever it refers to like an adjective. So, I havecome, I am come, for example is?
Student: Sono venuta.
Teacher: Sono venuta for females, or I would say sono venuto. We have come?
Student: Siamo venuti.
Teacher: Siamo venuti, for mixed or masculine groups, or just feminine?
Student: Siamo venute.
Teacher: Siamo venute. So when we are using to be in the past, we don’t need to ask any questions aboutwhether we going to match or not this -ato/ito/uto, we going to do it, we going to match whoever isdoing the going or coming or the verb we have there. But with to have, it’s a little bit morecomplicated. We need to think about whether we have lo/la/li/le, and if we have one of those thenwe worry about matching the verb. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to pass or to pass by?
Student: Passare.
Teacher: Passare. Good and how would you say past, like I have passed by, just passed?
Student: Passato.
Teacher: Passato. And passato actually is also a noun. Il passato means the past. So many of these-ato/ito/uto words are quite flexible in this way. You might find them as nouns as well as adjectives.How would you say we passed by to buy something? We passed by to buy something?
Student: Siamo passate comprare qualcosa.
Teacher: Good, but…
Student: A. A comprare.
Teacher: Good. A. We show that action towards that to buying. Siamo passate a comprare qualcosa, oruna cosa in this context could fit as well. We passed by to buy something – siamo passate acomprare una cosa, qualcosa. How would you say just we bought something?
Student: Abbiamo comprato una cosa.
Teacher: Abbiamo comprato una cosa. So here, comprato, does not match anything, there's no need forit to match anything. What if we say we bought them?
Student: Li abbiamo comprati.
Teacher: Very good. Li abbiamo comprati. So because we have li, this little word beginning with l, we'rematching the -ato, with this li abbiamo comprati. What was to give?
Student: Dare.
Teacher: Dare. And given?
Student: Dato.
Teacher: Dato. DATO.
Student: Dato.
Teacher: Dato. Which is also like a piece of data, of course this is where data comes from in English. InItalian you have dato and dati like the plural, and actually in English data is like a plural, no?Rather than a piece of data. So that actually just means a given, no? And we also even say that inEnglish. In English we can say it's a given to say something's obvious, it's a piece of data. So datofrom dare also means data. How would you say I have given them to my friend, I have given themto my friend? Give me the first bit first, I have given them?
Student: Li ho dato … ti.
Teacher: Dato? Good. Dati. Li ho dati. We want to match dato with li. To the my friend. So we have towhich is?
Student: A. 
Teacher: And the?
Student: Il.
Teacher: Good. Il. A and il, they will fuse together and they will give us al. AL, al. So that’s ‘a il’. Al. Sohow would you say to my friend?
Student: Al amico… al mio amico.
Teacher: Al mio amico. So give me that all together, I have given them to my friend.
Student: Li ho dati al mio amico.
Teacher: Very good. Li ho dati al mio amico. I have given them to you.
Student: Li ho dati a ti.
Teacher: So this is actually like the way we are splitting it up in English, no? But when we say in English‘I have given them to you’, this is also ‘I have given you them’ which is how we say it in Italian, no?I have given them to you, I have given you them, and this you them are just two little words at thebeginning.
Student: Ti li ho dati.
Teacher: And what happens to ti li as well, whenever we have ti lo, mi lo what does it become?
Student: Te li ho dati.
Teacher: Good. Te li ho dati, no? I have given you them, Te li ho dati. Good. So we've seen that la/li/lemeans we need to change the ending of -ato/uto/ito to match it. When we use ti, mi, or ci withoutany lo, la or whatever, these small sounds ti, mi, and ci, they can also cause matching to happen butit's optional, it's optional, so it's not something you need to worry about but I need to mention itbecause when you hear it you don't want to feel like you misunderstood all the rules about whenyou should and shouldn't be matching. So you might hear this but it's really not important for us,what is important is to match it when we have lo, la, le, or li, no? But when you get ti, mi, or ci byitself that could also cause some matching, but like I say it's optional. So if we say, for example,have you understood me, what is you have again?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. With our silent H. Have you understood me?
Student: Mi hai capito?
Teacher: Good. Mi hai capito. So this is correct, mi hai capito, but if it's a female speaking, who says mihai capito, you could hear the -ito matching the mi, no? Mi hai capita, no? Not the person you'respeaking to, it's matching the mi the little word that you've put there, but it's optional so mi haicapito, mi hai capita. How about have you understood us?
Student: Noi hai capiti.
Teacher: Noi is the word for ‘we’, no? what is the sound for us?
Student: Ci.
Teacher: Ci. 
Student: Ci hai capiti.
Teacher: Good so you can do that but you don't need to, no? So you could say ci hai capiti, or even thefeminine if we had a feminine us, ci hai capite, no? But it's perfectly common and normal to say cihai capito, so this agreement is optional. How would you say I haven't understood you?
Student: Non ti ho capito.
Teacher: Non ti ho capito. And if you're talking to a female you might also say?
Student: Non ti ho capita.
Teacher: Good. Non ti ho capita. How would you say I have given you the book?
Student: Ti ho dato il libro.
Teacher: Good. Ti ho dato il libro. And here you couldn't have any optional matching because the optionin matching only happens when we have mi, ti, or ci by itself. So here we have ‘I have given youthe book’, in this case we can't match mi, ti, or ci. I have given you it.
Student: Te l’ho dato.
Teacher: Te l’ho dato. So again we have the lo ho contracting together and here you wouldn't have anoptional matching with the te, of you, because you have a lo there. I have given it to you already, Ihave already given it to you. What is already?
Student: Già.
Teacher: Già. GIA. So I have already given you it?
Student: Te l’ho già dato.
Teacher: Good. Te l’ho già dato. I have already given you them?
Student: Te li ho già dati.
Teacher: Very good. Te li ho già dati. And there we have to change dato to match with the L word that wehave, li. Te li ho già dati. What was to do or to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. FARE. Done, or made, like in I have done, I have made, it is done, it is made, is fatto,fatto.
Student: Fatto.
Teacher: And you can hear I'm pronouncing two T’s here, fatto. FATTO.
Student: Fatto.
Teacher: So this version is also a noun like we saw il dato can be the piece of data, or i dati the data likein the plural. Il fatto is the fact. The fact. How would you say the facts?
Student: I fatti.
Teacher: I fatti, no? So a done, a made, is a fact, no? How would you say I have done or I have made it?
Student: L’ho fatto.
Teacher: L’ho fatto. And what if you meant a feminine thing? 
Student: L’ho fatta.
Teacher: L’ho fatta. We wouldn't hear it in la because it's still contracted, la and ho to l’ho, but we hear itin fatta. L’ho fatta. Very good. I have made them?
Student: Li ho fatti.
Teacher: Li ho fatti. So no contraction there with the plural, no? Li ho fatti. And what if you're talkingabout feminine things?
Student: Le ho fatte.
Teacher: Le ho fatte. Good. I have made you something, I have made something for you, we don't needthe for, we can just say I have made you something.
Student: Ti ho fatto una cosa.
Teacher: Ti ho fatto una cosa. Good. I have made you it?
Student: Ti l’ho fatto… te l’ho fatto.
Teacher: Good. Te l’ho fatto. I have made you it. Te l’ho fatto. And if you're talking about a femininething?
Student: Te l’ho fatta.
Teacher: Te l’ho fatta. Good. What does you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. Have you made us them? Have you made them for us? have you made us them?
Student: Ci li hai fatti.
Teacher: And what happens to ci li?
Student: Ce li hai fatti.
Teacher: Ce li hai fatti. Good. Ce li hai fatti. So fatti is agreeing with li, not with ce. Ce li hai fatti. Orif we were talking about feminine things instead of li?
Student: Ce le hai fatti… fatte.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Ce le hai fatte.
Teacher: Ce le hai fatte. Good. Have you understood the facts, have you understood the facts?
Student: Hai capito i fatti?
Teacher: Good. Hai capito i fatti? Good. So you have a couple of things to think about in the past inItalian, no? You need to think about whether you will use have or be when you are building yourpast, whether you will use to have or to be in the beginning to build that past structure, and also youwill think about whether you need to match your -ato, -ito, or -uto ending. Don't worry about all thethings you have to remember like all at once, no? Just when you want to say something, let that bethe motor for the thought no you will think about just the bits you need to rather than runningthrough the panorama of everything you know about the past, no? So you have a sentence you want to say in front of you and just the bits that arise whilst you are building it you can think thosethrough about whether you need to do any matching or whatever. And also listening, listeningallows you to review what you know when you hear something that's said in a certain way. All youhave to do is think about why it's said in this certain way and this will remind you what you know.So for example if i say li abbiamo comprati, li abbiamo comprati, first what does it mean?
Student: We bought them.
Teacher: We bought them, no? And what do you notice there in li abbiamo comprati?
Student: That uh, comprati matches with li.
Teacher: Perfect. Brilliant. So that's all you need to do, no? If you analyse the Italian you expose yourselfto and think about why it is the way it is beyond whether you understand it or not, why is it likethis, and you will revise in this way all of the different rules that you've learned to use. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What is it to understand?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: And we understand?
Student: Capiamo.
Teacher: Capiamo with one P, capiamo.
Student: Capiamo.
Teacher: I understand is capisco, capisco.
Student: Capisco.
Teacher: So not capo as we might expect it to be, capire to capo, now we go from capire to capisco. Sowith this verb and just a few others we have this /isc/ popping up but not for everyone, no? Wealready saw we understand which is?
Student: Capiamo.
Teacher: Capiamo. So no /isc/ popping up there but I understand, capisco. We also have this /isc/ poppingup for you so how would you say you understand?
Student: Capiski?
Teacher: Good this is the sound you're transferring but think about how it's spelled, ISC.
Student: Capisci.
Teacher: Good, again.
Student: Capisci.
Teacher: Capisci, no? Because when we have SCI or SCE, we get a /sh/ sound. Capisci, capisci. So, doyou understand?
Student: Capisci?
Teacher: Capisci? We said that il capo was the boss, no? The head, the boss, the top of whatever. So youcould say, I understand the boss.
Student: Capisco il capo.
Teacher: Capisco il capo. I have understood the boss.
Student: Ho capito il capo.
Teacher: Ho capito il capo. I have understood the bosses.
Student: Ho capito i capi.
Teacher: Ho capito i capi. So here we don't match, no? We don't need to match i capi with capito. Only ifwe say I have understood them, then we will match it. So let's do that, I have understood them?
Student: Li ho capiti. 
Teacher: Li ho capiti. Good. Have you understood?
Student: Hai capito.
Teacher: Have you understood me?
Student: Mi hai capito, or mi hai capita.
Teacher: Good. Mi hai capito, perfect. But you might also hear in this context, mi hai capita, knowingyou have the option to match with the mi. So I understand.
Student: Capisco.
Teacher: You understand.
Student: Capisci.
Teacher: We understand.
Student: Capiamo.
Teacher: Capiamo. There's no /isc/ popping up, capiamo. So it's only a handful of verbs do this, put thisextra /isc/ from nowhere but some really important ones like capire, so preferire, for example doesthe same. I think you can guess what preferire means, to…
Student: Prefer.
Teacher: To prefer, no? So I prefer, this verb also puts in this extra /isc/ from nowhere.
Student: Preferisco.
Teacher: Preferisco. Which means you prefer would be?
Student: Preferisci.
Teacher: Preferisci. What do you prefer?
Student: Che cosa preferisci.
Teacher: Cosa preferisci. Che cosa preferisci. What do you prefer to eat?
Student: Che cosa perferisci a mangiare.
Teacher: Did you say a mangiare? [Laughter] So, mangiare is already to eat, no?
Student: Okay.
Teacher: We don't need a mangiare. Only if we were moving towards that eating, like going to eat, wewould need it. So how would you say, again, ‘what do you prefer to eat’?
Student: Che cosa perferisci mangiare.
Teacher: Good. Cosa, che cosa perferisci mangiare. So we have preferisco, preferisci, but we prefer?
Student: Preferiamo.
Teacher: Preferiamo. For we, for noi, we don't have this /isc/ popping up. Words ending -ence or -ance inEnglish, ENCE or ANCE in English, you can make Italian just by changing that ending to -enza or-anza, ENZA or ANZA. So difference becomes?
Student: Differenza. 
Teacher: So we have the two F's and we pronounce them both. Differenza. And how would you saydifferences, differences?
Student: Differenze
Teacher: Differenze. The A to E. Importance?
Student: Importanza.
Teacher: Importanza. Consequence? This one changes a little bit, the QU becomes GU.
Student: Conseguenza.
Teacher: So consequence actually means with sequence, or with following because you also have the verbseguire which means to go after, to go after something or someone, to follow, or to continue.Conseguire is also a verb which means to obtain, to accomplish, to get. Perseguire, per we havelike for, you know? Perseguire, to chase, to pursue, to follow, so we have all of those verbs as wellyou might see around. So we have consequence, conseguenza, and consequences?
Student: Conseguenze.
Teacher: Conseguenze. Good. I don't understand the difference.
Student: Non capisco la differenza. And I don't see the difference.
Teacher: Non vedo la differenza. You don’t understand.
Student: Non capisci.
Teacher: Non capisci. You don’t understand the consequences.
Student: Non capisci le conseguenze.
Teacher: Good. Non capisci le conseguenze. You haven't understood the consequences.
Student: Non hai capito le conseguence.
Teacher: Good, but if you say you haven't understood them, and you're making reference to theconsequences?
Student: Non le hai capite.
Teacher: Good. Non le hai capite. Good. Action is azione, azione.
Student: Azione.
Teacher: And actions?
Student: Azioni.
Teacher: Azioni, azioni. Have you understood the consequences of your actions? Have you understoodthe consequences of your actions? Let's do the first bit first, have you understood the consequences?
Student: Hai capito le conseguence.
Teacher: Hai capito le conseguence. Of your actions? So what was of, like in demonstrate?
Student: Di. 
Teacher: Di. But when we say of your actions, the your actions, the word for the here is a plural feminine,no? Which is?
Student: Le.
Teacher: So di and le, they contract together and form delle.
Student: Delle.
Teacher: Delle. DELLE. So that's one word. So, of your actions?
Student: Delle tue azioni.
Teacher: Good. Altogether. Have you understood the consequences of your actions?
Student: Hai capito le conseguence delle tue azioni.
Teacher: Very good. Hai capito le conseguence delle tue, because azione is feminine. Azione, like the -ione words they are feminine, and it ends in an ‘e’ so we put it into plural with an ‘i’, but it's still afeminine word. Delle tue azioni. Hai capito le conseguence delle tue azioni. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to understand?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: And to prefer?
Student: Preferire.
Teacher: Preferire. And we saw that these two are a little bit irregular in that they have this /isc/ poppingup in the present for most people. Capisco, preferisco, capisci, preferisci. But not for we. For we,we have capiamo and preferiamo. To finish, to finish was finire.
Student: Finire.
Teacher: Finire. How would you say finished? Like I have finished, or it is finished?
Student: Finito.
Teacher: Finito. And we also have this in English slang of course. But in English slang, of course, we say‘finito’, no? ‘It’s finito’. So, how would you say, it is finished?
Student: È finito.
Teacher: È finito. So here we’re using it like an adjective, like a describing word. And as an adjectiveending -o, it will always change to match who or what it’s talking about. So if we were to say, ‘it isfinished’? And we meant something feminine?
Student: È finita.
Teacher: È finita. And they are finished?
Student: Sono? Sono finito… finiti. Sono finiti.
Teacher: Sono finiti. Good. Or for feminine things?
Student: Sono finite.
Teacher: Sono finite. But of course we can also use finito to talk about the past, like a verb, and here itwon’t necessarily change to match anything. So I have finished?
Student: Ho finito.
Teacher: Ho finito. Here it will never change, there’s nothing here it can match. We have finished?
Student: Abbiamo finito.
Teacher: Abbiamo finito. Still, nothing here it can match. We have finished it?
Student: Lo abbiamo finito.
Student: So we have lo and abbiamo contracted. L’abbiamo. L apostrophe abbiamo. And here the finitois matching lo. We have an L word there, and in its standard form finito, it’s already matching thelo. But if we say for example, we have finished them?
Student: Li abbiamo finiti.
Teacher: Li abbiamo finiti. And there finito matches li, finiti. Good. I finish is finisco, finisco. 
Student: Finisco.
Teacher: So again, we have this /isc/ popping up like in capisco, preferisco, now finisco. I finish it later.
Student: Lo finisco più tardi.
Teacher: Lo finisco più tardi. You finish.
Student: Finisci.
Teacher: Finisci. But we finish?
Student: Fin...finiamo.
Teacher: Finiamo.
Student: Finiamo.
Teacher: We’ll finish it tomorrow.
Student: Lo finiamo domani.
Teacher: Lo finiamo domani. He, she, or it finishes – all of that – she finishes, he finishes, it finishes, isfinisce, finisce.
Student: Finisce.
Teacher: That’s FINISCE. Finisce.
Student: Finisce.
Teacher: So what did we learn here? We learn that we have è for he/she/it, and we also learn that this /isc/change occurs also for he/she/it. Not just for the ‘I’ version and the ‘you’ version, but also for thehe/she/it version. Finisce. What was to understand?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: Capire. She understands?
Student: Capisce.
Teacher: Capisce. To prefer?
Student: Preferire.
Teacher: She prefers?
Student: Prefisce… Preferisce.
Teacher: Good. If we go too fast there, we lose a syllable. Preferisce. Good. And to finish, to finish?
Student: Finire.
Teacher: And he finishes?
Student: Finisce.
Teacher: Finisce. Good. Pulire, which was to clean, related to polish, also behaves like finire, capire,having this /isc/ pop up. So how would you say I clean, or I’m cleaning?
Student: Pulisco. 
Teacher: Pulisco. You clean?
Student: Pulisci.
Teacher: Pulisci. He cleans?
Student: Pulisce.
Teacher: Pulisce. But we clean?
Student: Puliamo.
Teacher: Puliamo. No /isc/ popping up there. So, this only occurs with a verbs, this /isc/ popping up, butwith some quite important verbs, as we’re seeing. All of them -ire verbs, capire, preferire, finire,pulire. What was I have?
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho. HO. You have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. He has, she has, it has is just ha. HA.
Student: Ha.
Teacher: So how would you say he has cleaned the house?
Student: Ha pulito la casa.
Teacher: Good. Ha pulito la casa. He has cleaned it, and we mean the house?
Student: La ha pulita.
Teacher: We actually have the contraction there as well, so it’s going to be easier.
Student: L’ha… L’ha pulita.
Teacher: L’ha pulita. So la and ha contracts, L apostrophe HA. And we understand that it’s femininebecause pulito changes to pulita. L’ha pulita. He has cleaned it, and we mean the house orsomething feminine. He hasn’t cleaned it.
Student: Non l’ha pulita.
Teacher: Good. Non l’ha pulita. He hasn’t cleaned them, still we mean the houses, something feminine.He hasn’t cleaned them.
Student: Non le ha pulite.
Teacher: Good. Non le ha pulite. He has finished it.
Student: Lo… L’ha finito.
Teacher: L’ha finito. He has finished it. L’ha finito. Or if we’re referring to something feminine that he’sfinished?
Student: L’ha finita. 
Teacher: L’ha finita. So actually we’ve seen two sounds for he/she/it with the verbs. We’ve seen /a/ justnow, as in ha, he has (HA), she has, and it has, and /e/ as we’ve seen in pulisce, finisce, capisce, oreven the word we learned from the beginning. He/she/it is, how is that?
Student: È.
Teacher: È, no? So just è by itself is he/she/it is, and just ha by itself is he/she/it has, and both e and hacan show us he, she, or it. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to sell?
Student: Vendere.
Teacher: Vendere. Good. And, he sells, she sells, it sells?
Student: Vende.
Teacher: Vende. What is he selling? What is she selling?
Student: Che vende? Che cosa vende?
Teacher: Che vende, cosa vende, che cosa vende. So this -e we added for -ere and -ire verbs to get thehe/she/it form. Vendere, -ere verb. Vende – he sells, she sells, it cells. But if we have an -are verb,we will use -a to show that it's he, she, or it. So what is to speak?
Student: Parlare.
Teacher: Parlare. So if you wanted to say he speaks, she speaks, or even it speaks?
Student: Parla.
Teacher: Parla. She speaks a lot, he speaks a lot, to say a lot you can just say ‘very’.
Student: Parla molto.
Teacher: Good. Parla molto. Good. What was to eat?
Student: Mangiare.
Teacher: Mangiare. He or she eats a lot.
Student: Mangia. Mangia molto.
Teacher: Mangia molto. Good. And mangia is spelled MANGIA. Again, GI giving us the soft /j/.Mangia. Mangia molto. So we saw until now the endings that we used for people, that we've beenusing for people, with the verbs, -o/i/iamo, no? They work for all the verbs. It doesn't matter if it'san -are verb, an -ere verb, or an -ire verb, but with the he, she, or it form we have a differencedepending on the type of verb. -are verbs use -a and -ere and -ire verbs use -e. How would you saywhat is he talking about? You can say of what he talks, of what she talks?
Student: Di che cosa parla?
Teacher: Good. Di che cosa parla? Di cosa parla? What are you talking about?
Student: Di che cosa parli tu?
Teacher: Di che cosa parli tu? Di cosa parli tu? If you wanted to put tu there to be more emphatic, no?What is she eating?
Student: Che cosa mangia.
Teacher: Che cosa mangia. Cosa mangia. How was when in Italian?
Student: Quando.
Teacher: Quando. When does he eat? When does she eat? 
Student: Quando mangia.
Teacher: Quando mangia. Good. So for -are verbs, we have -a for he/she/it. He wants, she wants, itwants, is vuole, VUOLE. Vuole.
Student: Vuole.
Teacher: So that’s he wants, she wants, it wants. So how would you say, what does he want to eat? Whatdoes she want to eat?
Student: Che cosa vuole mangiare.
Teacher: Good. Che cosa vuole mangiare. When does he want to eat? When does she want to eat?
Student: Quando vuole mangiare.
Teacher: Quando vuole mangiare. When has he eaten? When has she eaten? Which sounds a little weirdin English but it sounds perfectly fine in Italian. In Italian that would just sound like, when did heeat, when did she eat? So, when has he/has she eaten?
Student: Quando ha mangiato?
Teacher: Good. Quando ha mangiato? What has he eaten?
Student: Che cosa mangiato?
Teacher: Cosa mangiato. Che cosa mangiato. Has he eaten already? Has she eaten already?
Student: Ha già mangiato?
Teacher: Very good. Ha già mangiato? And già of already, and gia of mangiato is spelled in the sameway, no? GIA. Even though we don't hear the ‘i’ there in either. Ha già mangiato. So to want, towant, the to form is volere.
Student: Volere.
Teacher: VOLERE. So again, before we relate to this to volunteer, when you're a volunteer you dosomething for the wanting of it. So you can just think of the beginning of volunteer vol made into anItalian verb, volere, to want. But then the versions we get from this are a little bit all over the place,no? So we have I want.
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. VOGLIO. Voglio. We want.
Student: Vogliamo.
Teacher: Vogliamo. You want.
Student: Vogli… no. Voui.
Teacher: Yes even more irregular, voui. VUOI, voui. So we still end in an -i to show that it's you but quiteirregular, voui, and then he wants, she wants, it wants?
Student: Voule. 
Teacher: Voule. So not an easy one, this verb. You will notice most of the irregular verbs in mostlanguages are the very common verbs, like want, for example, verbs you say all the time, likesaying something a lot seems to wear it out, and it deforms easier. What was why or because?
Student: Perché.
Teacher: Perché. So per meant for, and che, what did it mean?
Student: What.
Teacher: Or what else? So when we say why, perché is like for what, but when we say because, perché ismore like for? For that.
Student: Okay.
Teacher: So che you can also use it like that, in the sense of ‘we want to see the books that you havebought’, ‘we want to see the books that you have bought’. That ‘that’ there is just che. So howwould you say we want to see the books?
Student: Vogliamo vedere i libri.
Teacher: That.
Student: Che.
Teacher: You have bought.
Student: Che hai comprati.
Teacher: And why why did you match it, comprati?
Student: Because of the books.
Teacher: Do you do that automatically because you have books? When do you match your -ato/ito/utowhen it's with to have?
Student: Ah, it's just when we have te li.
Teacher: Exactly, lo/la/li/le, no? Otherwise we don't need to worry about it.
Student: Okay.
Teacher: So, you have bought is just…?
Student: Che hai comprato.
Teacher: Good. Vogliamo vederi i libri che hai comprato. We want to see the books that you havebought. She wants to see the things that we have bought, how would that be?
Student: Vuole vedere le cose che abbiamo comprato.
Teacher: Very good. Vuole vedere le cose che abbiamo comprato. very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: How do you say my friend in Italian?
Student: Il mio amico.
Teacher: Il mio amico. My friend wants to come, so my friend is like he or she, no? He wants, my friendwants, so my friend wants to come?
Student: Il mio amico vuole venire.
Teacher: Good. Il mio amico vuole venire. My friends?
Student: I mii?
Teacher: So think about why it was weird, you're remembering that it was weird.
Student: Yes.
Teacher: We have mi, no? Which is the base of mi, or mia, or mie, and then we have the sound for themasculine plural which is?
Student: /i/.
Teacher: Also /i/. And what happens when you try to add that all together, the mi i? We put an ‘e’ toseparate them, so we get to hear them both – miei – so it's a bit irregular and that was why, miei, sothe e kind of jumps in to split up those two i’s.
Student: Okay.
Teacher: So tell me again, my friends?
Student: I miei amici.
Teacher: I miei amici. So how would you say my friends have come?
Student: I miei amici sono venuti.
Teacher: Very good. My friends are come, and my friends are like they, so they are come, sono venuti, myfriends have come, my friends are come, i miei amici sono venuti. Very good. Your friends came,your friends are come?
Student: I tuoi amici sono venuti.
Teacher: Good. I tuoi amici sono venuti. How would you say your friends are welcome here, your friendsare welcome here, your friends are well come here?
Student: I tuoi amici sono benvenuti qui.
Teacher: Very good. I tuoi amici sono benvenuti qui. So what was I know from sapere?
Student: So.
Teacher: So. Io so. And I have?
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho. So we mentioned that we have the same irregularity here. SO, so. HO, ho. What was youknow from sapere? 
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. SAI. And you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. HAI. We know?
Student: Sappiamo.
Teacher: Sappiamo. We have the weirdness of that double P where we have sapere, one P, and thensappiamo, double P, and we have was very similar.
Student: Abbiamo.
Teacher: Abbiamo, with a double B, with two B's. He has or she has or it has?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Ha. So what might he knows, she knows, it knows be?
Student: Sa.
Teacher: Sa. So we know this because we found a pattern between to have and to know. But what is toknow?
Student: Sapere.
Teacher: Sapere, which is an -ere verb, no? But still we are using -a for he/she/it, sa. So we shouldn't havean -a, no? And the same with to have. To have is avere. AVERE. So again it's an -ere verb but stillwe have ha, HA, for he, she and it. How would you say he doesn't know it, she doesn't know it?
Student: Non lo sa.
Teacher: Non lo sa. We mentioned before that to find was trovare.
Student: Trovare.
Teacher: How would you say found, as in I have found, or it is found?
Student: Trovato.
Teacher: Trovato. He hasn't found it?
Student: Non lo ha trovato.
Teacher: Good and what might happen to lo ha?
Student: Non l’ha trovato.
Student: Non l’ha trovato, no? So we have the contraction there. L apostrophe HA. Non l’ha trovato.And what if we meant a feminine thing? He hasn't found it, and we mean a feminine thing?
Student: Non l’ha trovata.
Teacher: Good. Non l’ha trovata. So la and ha contracts to the same thing as lo and ha, no? Lapostrophe HA, but we know we mean something feminine because we get trovata. Non l’hatrovata. How would you say he or she hasn't found them?
Student: Non non li ha trovata… trovati. 
Teacher: Good. Non li ha trovati. Ieri was yesterday. IERI. Ieri.
Student: Ieri.
Teacher: Ieri. Just like the beginning of yesterday. How would you say your friend found it yesterday,your friend has found it yesterday?
Student: Il tuo amico l'ha trovato ieri.
Teacher: Good. Il tuo amico l'ha trovato ieri. And what if you would say your friend has found themyesterday, and you refer to a feminine them?
Student: Il tuo amico l'ha trovate ieri.
Teacher: Good but we don't contract with the plurals le and li.
Student: Il tuo amico le ha trovate ieri.
Teacher: Very good. Il tuo amico le ha trovate ieri. We mentioned how already was già and we can saysomething then like your friend has already found it, your friend has already found it. How wouldthat be?
Student: Il tuo amico ha già… no, l'ha già trovato.
Teacher: Good. Il tuo amico l'ha già trovato. And your friend has already found them?
Student: Il tuo amico li ha già trovati.
Teacher: Good. Il tuo amico li ha già trovati. So we've learned how to make this version of the verb, -ato/ito/uto, which we can use to go into the past and also like an adjective. We can say for example,I have finished, it is finished, I have cleaned, it is cleaned or clean. And we've also seen how this -ato/ito/uto version might also be irregular sometimes. So for example, fare, to do or to make, fromthere we got fatto, that's a little bit irregular we have two T’s. What was to see?
Student: Vedere.
Teacher: Vedere. Veduto exists but much more common is visto, so that's an irregular version of our -utoform. We have veduto from vedere, but also visto. You can hear either but visto is much morecommon.
Student: Visto.
Teacher: How would you say I haven't seen your friends, I haven't seen your friends?
Student: Non ho visto i tuoi amici.
Teacher: Very good. Non ho visto i tuoi amici. And I haven't seen them?
Student: Non li ho visto… Non li ho visti.
Teacher: Very good. Non li ho visti. Here we match visto with li, visti. We've also seen that these-ato/ito/uto words are really flexible words. They can be used like verbs to talk about the past. Theycan be used like adjectives. Other than this possibility, some of these versions might also sometimesbe nouns. We've seen that we have to give which is?
Student: Dare.
Teacher: And given? 
Student: Dato.
Teacher: Dato, with one T. Dato which is a noun also, il dato the data, or the piece of data. We had to door to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. And made or done?
Student: Fatto.
Teacher: Fatto. Here we do have two T’s. Fatto it’s a little bit irregular. And il fatto can be the fact, ilfatto. So here we are getting nouns from these versions. Sometimes also we might notice just achange in gender for the -ato/ito/uto version, and that giving us the noun. So for example, how isseen from vedere?
Student: Visto.
Teacher: Visto. La vista is the view, so we just have a change in gender between visto and vista, and therewe have the noun. So you might notice that happening sometimes as well. The view, la vista.
Student: La vista.
Teacher: Have you seen the view?
Student: Hai visto la vista?
Teacher: Yes. Hai visto la vista? But if you say have you seen it, and you mean the view?
Student: L’hai vista?
Teacher: Exactly. L’hai vista. And here you’re are not using the noun, you're using the verb but it has toagree with la, la hai, l’hai, l’hai vista? Good. Haven't you seen the view?
Student: Non hai visto la vista?
Teacher: Non hai visto la vista? Haven't you seen the view? Non hai visto la vista? Have you seen theview already?
Student: Hai già visto la vista.
Teacher: Hai già visto la vista. So già is already, but yet is ancora, ancora.
Student: Ancora.
Teacher: ANCORA. Ancora. And it has the same position as già, so if you say for example haven't youseen the view yet, you will say: haven't you yet seen the view? So how would that be, yet is ancora,haven't you yet seen the view?
Student: Non hai ancora visto la vista?
Teacher: Good. Non hai ancora visto la vista? What was to clean like polish?
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: Pulire. Have you cleaned already?
Student: Hai già pulito?
Teacher: Hai già pulito? Haven't you cleaned yet? 
Student: Non hai ancora pulito?
Teacher: Good. Non hai ancora pulito? So already is già, and ancora is yet, but you can also think of itin the sense that già goes with positive sentences and ancora with negative sentences, no? Haveyou cleaned already? Hai già pulito? Haven’t you cleaned yet? Non hai ancora pulito? We haven'tcleaned yet?
Student: Non abbiamo ancora pulito.
Teacher: Very good. Non abbiamo ancora pulito. And it is clean?
Student: È pulito.
Teacher: È pulito. So here you use it like an adjective, è pulito. So if you meant the house?
Student: È pulita.
Teacher: È pulita. Pulito, you can also change the gender to get the noun. So pulita, or una pulita meansa clean. You could say for example, I want to give the house a clean, I want to give a clean to thehouse. How would that be?
Student: Voglio dare una pulita alla casa.
Teacher: Very good. Voglio dare una pulita alla casa. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to import in Italian?
Student: Importare.
Teacher: And this is literally like in door like portal, port – portal, or passport, passport which in Italian ispassaporto which literally just means it passes port. Passa porto – passaporto. so porto is port, andporta is door. So we have il porto the port, and la porta the door. So sometimes in Italian you willnotice that a change in gender with nouns gives us a shift in meaning and a new word like il porto,the port, and la porta, the door. How do you say the doors?
Student: Le porte.
Teacher: Le porte. So importare is to import and this also means to matter, of course this is where we getthe meaning of importante from. Importing, mattering, important. So importare is to import and tomatter. So how would you say it matters?
Student: Importa.
Teacher: Importa. It doesn't matter.
Student: Non importa.
Teacher: Non importa. And you could also say I don't care. To say I don't care you will just say: it doesn'tmatter to me, it doesn't matter to me. So how would that be? Me and to me is the same.
Student: Non mi importa.
Teacher: Non mi importa. I don't care, non mi importa. If you want to say something like ‘yes itmatters’, you can say yes that it matters, yes that it matters. Si che… Si che importa, and of coursethis che meaning that is like in perché because, because of that, for that, perché. So you might hearthat this well, si che importa. it does matter. How would you say I do care?
Student: Io si che importo.
Teacher: Si che importo would be ‘yes I do matter’, but we said that I don't care or I care would be itmatters to me so how is that?
Student: Mi importa.
Teacher: Mi importa. And if you want to say you know it does matter to me, I do care?
Student: Si che mi importa.
Teacher: Si che mi importa. Yes that, si che, yes that it matters to me. Si che mi importa. How wouldyou say what does it matter?
Student: Che importa?
Teacher: Che importa? Good. Che importa? So then we have che as as what, no? So when we say si cheimporta, we have che like that, yes that, yes that it matters, it does matter, but then che importa,we have che as what, what does it matter. You remember how is to have, to have?
Student: Avere. 
Teacher: Avere. With a V. Avere. AVERE. And this was extremely irregular, no? What was to know?
Student: Sapere.
Teacher: Sapere. Which was also very irregular, but avere and sapere share a lot of their irregularities.For example, we had you have from avere. is was that?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Good and you know from sapere.
Student: Sai.
Teacher: Sai. He or she has?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Ha. We just removed the ‘i’ of hai and we get ha. And he or she knows?
Student: Sa.
Teacher: Sa. So we have these two very irregular verbs, and they share a lot of their irregularities. Whatwas the word for possible?
Student: Possibile.
Teacher: Possibile. And I can, I am able?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso. We can, we are able?
Student: Possiamo.
Teacher: Possiamo. And you can, you are able?
Student: Poui.
Teacher: Poui. Good. PUOI. So we have posso, possiamo, poui, but to can, let's say, or to be able, ofcourse, we don't have to can in English is potere, potere. POTERE.
Student: Potere.
Teacher: So again potere is a very irregular verb, to get posso, puoi, from potere, but potere is easy forus to remember because it's where we get potent from. How would you say potent in Italian?
Student: Potente.
Teacher: Potente. Potente, no? We have an ENT, we have an ENT that we can add an -e to potent,potente. Or we can think of going from potere, getting rid of our -ere, and putting in ENTE, to getour -ente adjective, potente. Potere can also be a noun. If you say il potere, it means the power. Soil potere is the power, how would you say the powers?
Student: I poteri.
Teacher: I poteri. Good. So potere, to be able, like sapere, to know, and avere, to have, is seriouslyirregular, no? Potere to posso to poui. He can or she can is può, può. That's PUO. So this is crazyirregular, no? It doesn't even end in an -e or an -a for he or she. Può, PUO. But we do the same aswith sapere and avere if we think about moving between hai and ha, and sai and sa. We just remove the last ‘i’, the last /i/ sound, the last -i from the you form, so we have sai – sa, hai – ha,poui and…?
Student: Può.
Teacher: Può. Good. The word for he is lui. LUI, lui.
Student: Lui.
Teacher: He. He can?
Student: Lui può.
Teacher: Lui può. Good. And the word for she is lei. LEI, lei.
Student: Lei.
Teacher: So she can?
Student: Lei può.
Teacher: Lei può. So you might find yourself using these little words for he, she, more often then otherwords like io or tu as it's more ambiguous, no? We have può for he and for she for example. Wehave ha, sa, for he and for she. So the word for he, lui, LUI, and the word for she, lei, LEI. Howwould you say can he come using the word for he?
Student: Lei può venire.
Teacher: what was…
Student: Lui può venire.
Teacher: Good. Lui può venire. Può venire lui. Can she come to eat, using the word for she?
Student: Lei può venire a mangiare?
Teacher: Very good. Lei può venire a mangiare? Può venire a mangiare lei? Our, our like in ‘our house’is nostro, nostro. NOSTRO. So how would you say our house or our home?
Student: La nostra casa.
Teacher: La nostra casa, which would sound more like our house, or our home. We can change the ordera little bit to get more the feeling of our home.
Student: La casa nostra.
Teacher: Casa nostra. Just casa nostra. So if you were to say can she come to eat at our house, can shecome to eat at our place, how would that be?
Student: Lei puo venire a mangiare a casa nostra?
Teacher: Lei puo venire a mangiare a casa nostra? The word for but was ma. MA, ma.
Student: Ma.
Teacher: How would you say he can't but she can?
Student: Lui non può venire ma lei può venire. 
Teacher: Good, you repeated venire but you didn't have to necessarily. You could say lui non può ma leipuò. Or also for ma, you can use però that also exists in Italian for but. Lui non può però lei può.Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: so what was to be able or to can, let's say, very much like potent, related to potent?
Student: Potere.
Teacher: Potere. Good. So now that we have potere, to be able, we can say for example, I have been ableto do it, no? Or I haven't been able to do it, for example. So potere, in I have been able, what ispotere going to become?
Student: Posso… possito.
Teacher: So you have -ere, and if you say for example, ho – I have, ho – been able, what will poterebecome?
Student: Potuto.
Teacher: Good.
Student: Potuto.
Teacher: Of course. So, I have been able to do it. Let's build it bit by bit. I have been able to do it.
Student: Ho potuto farlo.
Teacher: Very good. Ho potuto farlo. And where else can that lo go?
Student: L’ho potuto fare.
Teacher: Very good. L’ho potuto fare. We can contract lo and ho to get l’ho. Very good. I haven't beenable to do it yet, what was the word for yet?
Student: Già.
Teacher: Già was already, and for yet we had a…
Student: Ancora.
Teacher: Ancora. A longer word, ancora, meaning yet and this word also means again, once again. Butyou can use it like yet. So I haven't been able to do it yet, or in Italian, I haven't yet been able to doit.
Student: Non l’ho ancora potuto fare.
Teacher: Very good. Non l’ho ancora potuto fare. Good. Have you been able to do it yet?
Student: Lo hai ancora potuto fare.
Teacher: Good, okay, lo hai becomes?
Student: L’hai.
Teacher: L’hai. And this is a little bit of a trick, because have you been able to do it yet is okay in English.In English we get two meanings, have you been able to do it already, and have you been able to doit yet, no? Two slightly different meanings, but in Italian it's much more già goes with positivesentences, and ancora with negative most of the time, much more straightforward. So have youbeen able to do it yet? 
Student: L’hai già potuto fare.
Teacher: So, hai già potuto farlo, l’hai già potuto fare, no? So even though we might say yet in English,if it's a positive sentence without non, no? Then we use già, not ancora. To live in Italian is vivere,vivere.
Student: Vivere.
Teacher: That’s VIVERE. And you notice that we have the accent not on the second from the end, but thethird from the end, or at the beginning in this case. Vivere. to live. How would you say she liveshere?
Student: Lei vive qui.
Teacher: Very good. Vive qui, or if you want to clarify or emphasise, lei vive qui. She wants to live here?
Student: Lei vuo vivere qui.
Teacher: it was a little bit more than vuo. I see why you went to vuo because like vuo and può, no? But itwas a bit longer. Vuole.
Student: Vuole.
Teacher: Good. So that’s VUOLE. Vuole.
Student: Lei vuole vivere…
Teacher: Vivere. Good.
Student: Qui.
Teacher: Very good. Lei vuole vivere qui. So we had qui for here and what for there was là. LA, là.
Student: Là.
Teacher: And what was the word for he?
Student: Lui.
Teacher: Lui. Good. LUI. So how would you say he can't live there?
Student: Lui non può vivere là.
Teacher: Lui non può vivere là. You remember the word for where?
Student: Dove.
Teacher: Dove. Where does he live?
Student: Dove vive?
Teacher: Dove vive? And if you want to show that it's he?
Student: Dove vive lui?
Teacher: Dove vive lui? Lui dove vive? I don't know where he lives, I don't know where he lives.
Student: Non so dove vive lui.
Teacher: Very good. Non so dove vive lui. So you can put this lui at the end, or you can also put it in thisquite strange position for English which would be non so lui dove vive. I don't know he where he lives. And that's because we don't want to break up that verbal clues, that verbal block of thesentence of dove vive. So lui dove vive, or dove vive lui. Non so lui dove vive. We wouldn't put itbetween the dove and the vive. So you should listen out for word order habits like this, and you willnotice things like this, like any extra words, like lui or lei shouldn't interrupt the verbal block of asentence. So we have vivere to live, vivente as an adjective. È vivente, what might it mean, whatdo you think it means?
Student: Living. It’s living.
Teacher: Living. Good. It’s this kind of adjectives, the -ente adjective, living, vivente. So actually youcould say living being. What is a being?
Student: Essere.
Teacher: To be is also the noun, of a being. So if you want to say living being?
Student: Essere vivente.
Teacher: Good. Essere vivente. And if you wanted to say living beings?
Student: Esseri viventi.
Teacher: Very good. Esseri viventi. Living beings. You might also hear that adjective in a sentence, likeyou know, he's the best living writer, you know, much more useful than it might seem, thisadjective. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to do what to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. And to show or to make see?
Student: Mostrare.
Teacher: Good. Mostrare is to show but also extremely common in the spoken language especially, youcan say to make see, to make to see.
Student: Fare vedere.
Teacher: Fare vedere. And it's also very common to hear far vedere when you have these two to formscoming together, fare, can drop the ‘e’, far vedere. He wants to show us it, he wants to show us it?
Student: Lui vuo far vederlo.
Teacher: So we saw può, which was he can or she can, and vuo-le is very similar, you start VUO, but thenyou also get LE. of course, an -e for he, she, and it. So vuole.
Student: Vuole.
Teacher: So he wants to show us it, he wants to show it to us?
Student: Ci lo.
Teacher: Ci lo becomes?
Student: Ce lo.
Teacher: Ce lo. So ci lo, mi lo, ti lo, becomes ce lo, me lo, te lo. He wants to show us it, he wants to makeus see it.
Student: Lui voule farcelo vedere.
Teacher: Very good. Lui voule farcelo vedere. But we could have of had ce lo voule far vedere. Butbecause it’s very common to say far vedere, instead of fare vedere, it’s very nature to put ce lothere, so voule farcelo vedere. Can he show us it?
Student: Lui poui farcelo vedere?
Teacher: Good, but lui poui? Può.
Student: Lui può farcelo vedere?
Teacher: Good. Lui può farcelo vedere? Can he show us it? Good. So vedere is to see, and how do wesay seen, like in I have seen.
Student: Visto.
Teacher: Visto. Very good. It's irregular, no? Visto. I have seen you?
Student: Ti ho visto. 
Teacher: Ti ho visto. And if you're talking to a female you have the option to change visto to vista, but it'snot essential. You could say ti ho vista. I have shown you it, I have made you see it. So first wehave you and it, let's deal with that.
Student: Te lo.
Teacher: Te lo. Good. So, I have shown you it, I have made you see it.
Student: Te l’ho fatto vedere.
Teacher: Te l’ho fatto vedere. Very good. So even though we have te l’ho, we still have lo and hocontracting so te l’ho. TE L apostrophe HO, is already I have to you it. Made, fatto, vedere, madeseen, I have shown you it. Te l’ho fatto vedere. So we have fare which is to do or to make, and tosay was dire. DIRE.
Student: Dire.
Teacher: I have said is ho detto, ho detto.
Student: Ho detto.
Teacher: That’s DETTO. So that's a little bit irregular as well. And of course it's where we get ditto from inEnglish. When somebody says something and you agree and you say ditto, this is actually just dettoand it's coming from the saying in Italian of you have said it. When you agree with somebody inItalian, instead of just saying ditto like you do in English, in Italian you will say you have said it. Sohow will that be, you have said it?
Student: L’hai detto.
Teacher: L’hai detto.
Student: L’hai detto.
Teacher: With the contraction. L’hai detto. So this is how would say ditto in Italian. I agree, you have saidit, you have said what I was thinking. L’hai detto. Detto also has a meaning as a noun. Il detto isthe saying, or a saying, un detto. So we have un again for the masculine a or an, and una forfeminine, like in una macchina, so un detto is a saying. How would you say, it is a very wellknown, it is a very known saying, so in Italian you will say it is a saying very known. Start from thebeginning, it is a saying.
Student: È un detto.
Teacher: È un detto. Good. So we remember it from ditto in English but it has an e in Italian. È un detto.Very well known. What was the word for very connected to multiple?
Student: Molto.
Teacher: Molto. And known, are we going to use sapere, or conocere?
Student: Conocere.
Teacher: Yes it’s acquainted, it's known, so known from conocere?
Student: Conosciuto.
Teacher: Conosciuto. So let's put that all together. It's a very well-known saying. 
Student: È un detto molto conosciuto.
Teacher: Good. Very good. È un detto molto conosciuto. You can also say popolare, what does thatmean?
Student: Popular.
Teacher: Popular. And of course, popular is related to people. This is where get people from, from popular.Popular just means of the people, like pop music just means popular music, people music. So we getpeople from that same root population as well. How would you say she told me a saying, she toldme, she has told me a saying.
Student: Mi ha detto un detto.
Teacher: Good. Mi ha detto un detto. She has told me saying. What has she told me, what did she tellme?
Student: Che cosa mi ha detto?
Teacher: Che cosa mi ha detto? Cosa mi ha detto? The word for nothing in Italian is niente. NIENTE.Niente.
Student: Niente.
Teacher: And we have a double negative in Italian. So if you say for example, he told me nothing, you willsay ‘he hasn't told me nothing’ or ‘he hasn't told me anything’. So how would that be?
Student: Non mi ha detto niente.
Teacher: very good. Non mi ha detto niente. He hasn't told me anything, she hasn't told me anything. Youmight also hear di niente, like you're welcome, don't worry about it, you're welcome. Di niente, ofnothing literally. How would you say she didn't do anything to you, she didn't do anything to you,she hasn't done anything to you.
Student: Non ha fatto niente… non ti ha fatto niente.
Teacher: Very good. Non ti ha fatto niente. She hasn't done anything to you. So we've seen how from fareand dire, we have fatto and detto. Which are both slightly irregular in that fatto has two T’s, ratherthan being just ‘fato’. And detto also has two T’s, and has an ‘e’ in there, which we wouldn't expect.We'd expect it to be more like ditto that we have in English as dire is an -ire verb. So fatto anddetto, we have from fare and dire, and both of these versions can also be nouns. So we have fatto,fact, and detto, saying. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: So what was to make or to do again?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. And to say?
Student: Dire.
Teacher: Dire. And these are quite irregular little verbs, and they share some of their irregularities as we'veseen with detto, and fatto, they both have this double T popping up. For their ‘I’ forms, so to say Ido, I make, or I say, I tell, they also share an irregularity, although they sound quite different. Direbecome dico, dico. ‘I say’, io dico.
Student: Dico.
Teacher: And fare, for I do or I make becomes faccio.
Student: Faccio.
Student: So they sound very different, but they both have a ‘c’ popping up from nowhere. We have DICO,dico. and then faccio, FA… maybe you can tell me how this is spelled. Faccio. Faccio.
Student: FACIO.
Teacher: Very good only that it has two C’s, there's a slight pause there, faccio, so it's FACCIO, faccio. Sothey both have C’s popping up from nowhere, dico, faccio, but they sound very different. Actuallythe C we can also find it in English like in deficient but is just from fare. Deficient, away fromdoing not enough. So from dire we have dico for ‘I’. How would you say I'm telling you it?
Student: Te lo dico.
Teacher: Te lo dico. And you can use this like an expression, well if you had ‘I’ on the end, te lo dico io,te lo dico io in Italian, to mean like I'm telling you, I know, listen to what I'm saying. Te lo dico io.So, we have dico for I say, for you say we might have?
Student: Dici.
Teacher: Dici. Very good. How will you say what you say? You can use this like in English like you makea suggestion to somebody and then you say what do you say, what do you think? So how would thatbe, what do you say?
Student: Che dici?
Teacher: Che dici? So maybe you make a suggestion and then you say che dici, what do you think? so wehave dico, dici, what do you think he says, she says, it says might sound like?
Student: Diche?
Teacher: We go from dici to?
Student: Dice.
Teacher: Dice. A dico, dici, dice. So this is how we deal with irregular verbs. So we see for example inthis case the C pop up and we keep it there. Dico, dici, dice. And we try to make these relations between different versions of the verb. In the same way if you want to say we say, we tell, howmight that be?
Student: Diciamo.
Teacher: Diciamo.
Student: Diciamo.
Teacher: Good. So the ‘i’ of -iamo just makes the C soft and you don't really hear it. Diciamo. Good. Sowe have dire, dico, dici, dice, diciamo. To do or to make was?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. And I do or I make was faccio. Spelled FACCIO. Faccio.
Student: Faccio.
Teacher: How would you say I will do it later?
Student: Lo faccio più tardi.
Teacher: Very good. Lo faccio più tardi. We do, we make?
Student: Facciamo.
Teacher: Facciamo. Good. What are we doing?
Student: Che facciamo?
Teacher: Che facciamo? Che cosa facciamo? What are we doing here?
Student: Che facciamo qui?
Teacher: Che facciamo qui? Cosa facciamo qui? So from fare, we have faccio, I do, I make, facciamo,we do, we make, but but we saw briefly before that for you for tu, we have tu fai, tu fai, like togive, dare and dai, we had fare and fai. He/she/it does we can get from fai, we just take away the‘i’ and we left with?
Student: Fa.
Teacher: Fa. And also if we just go from fare treating it like a regular verb, taking away our -are, andputting -a, will also get fa. So fa, FA, is he does, or she does, or it does or makes. He's doing it now,he's doing it now, and for now you can just use the word for hour to mean now. What was the wordfor hour?
Student: Ora.
Teacher: Ora. Good. So he's doing it now?
Student: Lo fa ora.
Teacher: Lo fa ora. Good. Or adesso, also means now, adesso. You could also say he will do it now, it'sjust the context, he will do it now, he will do it in a bit.
Student: Lo fa ora.
Teacher: Lo fa ora. The same, exactly the same, just by the context. He won't do it today?
Student: Non lo fa oggi. 
Teacher: Non lo fa oggi. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to say or to tell?
Student: Dire.
Teacher: Dire. And I say or I tell?
Student: Dico.
Teacher: Dico. Good. And that C that we have popping up that in dico, we can also see in Latin English inwords like dictionary, diction, that’s related to dire and that C that popping up there is the same Cpopping up in dico. How would you say you say?
Student: Dici.
Teacher: Dici. He or she or it says or tells?
Student: Dice.
Teacher: Dice. And we say, we saying?
Student: Diciamo.
Teacher: Diciamo. They say is dicono, dicono.
Student: Dicono.
Teacher: Dicono. So we have -ono for they, and also we notice that it doesn't take the accent. we say inDICono, not diCOno. Dicono.
Student: Dicono.
Teacher: What was they are?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. So we have the -ono here too. We had it all along, but of course here it must take theaccent because it's only two syllables, sono. So this -ono for they, we have it for -ere and -ire verbs,-ono, and it usually doesn't take the accent. Of course, in sono it has to, but otherwise we will avoidputting the accent on it. So we have dicono, they say, they tell. What was to live?
Student: Vivere.
Teacher: Vivere. And they live?
Student: Vivono.
Teacher: Vivono. Where do they live?
Student: Dove vivono?
Teacher: Dove vivono? Dove vivono loro, if you want to add that. To offer is offrire, offrire. OFFRIRE.Offrire.
Student: Offrire.
Teacher: How would you say I'm offering, I offer? 
Student: Offro.
Teacher: Offro. And you can also use this to say I pay. We mentioned before we can say I invite you,invito io, ti invito. You can also say offro io, I offer, I pay. So offro, I offer, and you offer?
Student: Offri.
Teacher: Offri. And he or she offers?
Student: Offre.
Teacher: Offre. We offer?
Student: Offriamo.
Teacher: Offriamo. And they offer, they’re offering?
Student: Offriamo… offROno.
Teacher: Good, and we won't have the accent on the -ono.
Student: Offrono.
Teacher: Offrono. So that's very important for our they form, we don't have the accent on our ending.Offrono. Let's go to eat, they are paying, they, are offering.
Student: Andiamo a mangiare, offrono loro.
Teacher: Very good. Andiamo a mangiare, offrono loro. What was to understand?
Student: Capire.
Teacher: Capire. And we understand?
Student: Capiamo.
Teacher: Capiamo. Very good, and I understand?
Student: Capishco.
Teacher: Capisco.
Student: Capisco.
Teacher: Very good we have this /isc/ popping up, capisco. Good. I understand, capisco, you understand?
Student: Capisci.
Teacher: Capisci. Very good the ‘i’ softens the SC there, capisci. He or she understands?
Student: Capisce.
Teacher: Capisce. And also for they, we will have this this /isc/ popping up again, so they understand?
Student: Capiscono.
Teacher: Capiscono. Very good. Capiscono, no? Capiscono. We don't accent the -ono, very good. Theydon't understand us?
Student: Non ci capiscono.
Teacher: Very good. Non ci capiscono. What was to finish? 
Student: Finire.
Teacher: Finire. And I finish?
Student: Finisco.
Teacher: Finisco. And they finish?
Student: Finiscono.
Teacher: Finiscono. Good. To clean?
Student: Pulire.
Teacher: Pulire. I clean?
Student: Pulisco.
Teacher: Pulisco. Another /isc/ verb. He or she cleans?
Student: Pulisce.
Teacher: Pulisce. They clean?
Student: Puliscono.
Teacher: Puliscono. But we clean?
Student: Puliamo.
Teacher: Puliamo. For for we -iamo, we don't have this /isc/ popping up. What was to prefer?
Student: Preferire.
Teacher: Preferire. She, and let's use the word for she if we can remember it, she prefers it?
Student: Lei… lei lo preferisce.
Teacher: Lei lo preferisce. Good. And they prefer?
Student: Loro preferiscono.
Teacher: Preferiscono, loro preferiscono. Very good. so we have -ono for -ere and -ire verbs, but for -areverbs, we have -ano. ANO. So for he/she/it, and the plural of he/she/it, if we think about it, they isthe plural of he or she – two he’s is they, two she's is they. So for he/she/it, and the plural ofhe/she/it, they, we have different versions for -are, and for -ere/-ire verbs. For -ere/-ire verbs, wehave ‘e’ for he/she/it, and -ono for they, and for -are verbs, we have ‘a’ for he/she/it, and -ano forthey. The rest of the endings -iamo, -o, -i, they count for both -are and -ire verbs, for all verbs. Sowhat was to eat?
Student: Mangiare.
Teacher: Mangiare. And what type of verb?
Student: -are.
Teacher: -are, -are verb. So if you want to say he eats or she eats?
Student: Mangia.
Teacher: Mangia. And they eat? 
Student: ManGIAno.
Teacher: Good but…?
Student: Mangiano.
Teacher: Mangiano. Good, the accent away from -ano, mangiano. What are they eating?
Student: Che cosa mangiano?
Teacher: Che cosa mangiano? Cosa mangiano? To speak, related to fable?
Student: Parlare.
Teacher: Parlare. We had the F to P switch, like in father – padre, fable – parlare. Actually favola,favola, means fairytale in Italian, which is of course fable. And again you have the B to V shift,favola, fable. So we have parlare, to speak, and he speak so she speaks?
Student: Parla.
Teacher: Parla. So before we put the a we need to make a quick check, what verb do I have? Okay -areverb – parla. They speak?
Student: Parlano.
Teacher: Parlano. Good. Parlano. They speak a lot. For a lot you can just use very.
Student: Parlano molto.
Teacher: Parlano molto. Troppo, TROPPO, troppo, means too much.
Student: Troppo.
Teacher: They speak too much.
Student: Parlano troppo.
Teacher: They eat too much.
Student: Mangiano troppo.
Teacher: But they eat a lot.
Student: Mangiano molto.
Teacher: Good. Mangiano molto. Tell me again what was to do or to make?
Student: Fare.
Teacher: Fare. I do or I make?
Student: Facco.
Teacher: Good you remembering the C’s, but… good.
Student: Faccio.
Teacher: Faccio. Good. FACCIO. Faccio.
Student: Faccio. 
Teacher: So the C popping up here in faccio or the C’s popping up here, we can also find them in LatinEnglish. We mentioned deficient or efficiency is related to fare – fact. We've seen before, factor –factory, all of those words related to fare and we have the C in Latin English as well. So faccio, Ido, I make. We do or we make?
Student: Facciamo.
Teacher: Facciamo. So you don't really hear the ‘i’ here, it’s just kind of a changing that C to a soft C,facciamo. You do?
Student: Facci.
Teacher: We have no C’s here actually, this one was like dai, that popular expression from dare, to give,which means like come on.
Student: Fai.
Teacher: Fai. Good. So that’s you do, or you make, you're doing, you're making – fai. He or she does ormakes?
Student: Fa.
Teacher: Fa. Just fa. And they, they make or they do is fanno, fanno.
Student: Fanno.
Teacher: Which has a slight irregularity, can you spot the irregularity in fanno?
Student: It has two N’s.
Teacher: It has two N’s. Good. There’s a double N there. Fanno. What they doing?
Student: Che cosa fanno.
Teacher: Che cosa fanno. What are they showing you?
Student: Che cosa ti mostrano… ah, que cosa ti fanno vedere.
Teacher: Good, but both are fine. Cosa ti mostrano, or cosa ti fanno vedere.
Student: Cosa ti fanno vedere.
Teacher: Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was I want?
Student: Voglio.
Teacher: Voglio. VOGLIO, volgio. They want, we can build it from I want, voglio. So how might it be,they want?
Student: Vogliono.
Teacher: Vogliono, Good. So we don't go from volere, to want, with this very irregular verb vogliono.What do they want to do today?
Student: Che cosa vogliono fare oggi.
Teacher: Good. Che cosa vogliono fare oggi. What do they want to tell me, what do they want to say tome?
Student: Cosa vogliono dirmi.
Teacher: Yeah, that’s fine. Che cosa vogliono dirmi. And you can also have it at the beginning. Che cosami vogliono dire. What was I can?
Student: Posso.
Teacher: Posso. So what might they can be?
Student: Possono.
Teacher: Possono. Good. So again we go from posso rather than from potere, to be able, with these veryirregular verbs. It makes more sense to look at the other versions of the verb, rather than the toform. But we still have to look back to the to form, to understand if we need to add an -ono or an -ano. Because volere, potere, okay they are -ere verbs so we have -ono for they, rather than -ano.Possono, vogliono. Aspettare means to wait. Aspettare.
Student: Aspettare.
Teacher: So that ASPETTARE. He’s waiting for me. Or this might be more like he's awaiting me as wedon't need the word for for. So he's awaiting me?
Student: Mi aspetta.
Teacher: Good. Mi aspetta. We have an -are verb so we used ‘a’ for he/she/it. They are waiting for me?
Student: Mi aspettano.
Teacher: Good. Mi aspettano. Very good. So again -are verb, so we have -ano for they. Mi aspettano.They're waiting for me. We awaiting for you?
Student: Ti aspettiamo.
Teacher: Ti aspettiamo. Good. So for -are verbs we have -ano for they, and for -ere/-ire verbs we have -ano. But we also have some very strange verbs where this isn't the case. For example to know, ourgeneral to know is?
Student: Sapere. 
Teacher: Sapere. And to have?
Student: Avere.
Teacher: Avere. So both are -are verbs, sapere, avere, but both of these use -anno for they, although theyare -are verbs, and -anno with double N like in fanno, for fare. So we get sanno, they know, fromsapere, and hanno, HANNO, and of course the H is silent. Hanno for they have, from avere. Alsofor the he/she/it form, we have an ‘a’ popping up rather than an ‘e’. So for example he has or shehas was?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Ha. He knows, she knows?
Student: Sa.
Teacher: Sa. So these two -ere verbs are particularly irregular. They give us ha, sa, and now sanno andhanno. Do they know?
Student: Sanno?
Teacher: Sanno? So this we would use if we want to follow this up, do they know that blah, blah, blah, butif we just say do they know by itself, we would say do they know it in Italian.
Student: Lo sanno?
Teacher: Lo sanno? Do they know that he knows?
Student: Sanno che lui sa?
Teacher: Very good. Sanno che sa? Sanno che lui sa? Do they know if they have sold them? Do theyknow if – what was what for if?
Student: Se.
Teacher: Good. So do they know if?
Student: Sanno se.
Teacher: Sanno se. They have sold them?
Student: Lo hanno venduto.
Teacher: Very good, that would be if they have sold it, but how about if they've sold them?
Student: Li… Li hanno venduti.
Teacher: Very good. Very good. Sanno se li hanno venduti. Do they know if they are sold? So do theyknow if say if?
Student: Sanno se.
Teacher: They are sold?
Student: Sono venduti.
Teacher: Very good. Sanno se sono venduti? Very good. Do they know what they are doing?
Student: Sanno che cosa fanno? 
Teacher: Good. Sanno che cosa fanno? Sanno cosa fanno? Good. What was to wait again?
Student: Aspettare.
Teacher: Aspettare. They have waited for me, they have awaited me?
Student: Mi hanno aspetta.
Teacher: Mi hanno?
Student: Aspetta.
Teacher: I think we're missing out a syllable there.
Student: Aspettato.
Teacher: Ah, so they have awaited me?
Student: Mi hanno aspettata.
Teacher: Good, so you change that to match your gender, which is optional. Mi hanno aspettata, or Iwould say, mi hanno aspettato. And that change what you made is optional, you don't have to doit. They weren't able to wait for me, they haven't been able to wait for me. So, they haven’t?
Student: Non hanno.
Teacher: They haven’t been able?
Student: Non hanno potuto.
Teacher: Potuto. To wait for me.
Student: Non hanno potuto aspettarmi.
Student: Very good. Non hanno potuto aspettarmi. So we always want to divide up the idea as far as wecan. They haven't been able to wait for me, and often when we do that maybe we find that there’sbits we miss out because we think about them first in English, and later in Italian or vice versa, butthat's fine. The first thing we do is we have a run-through, breaking the sentence up or breaking theidea up in the smallest parts possible. They weren't able to wait for me. Non hanno potutoaspettarmi. Very good. 

Italian Track - Level: Intermediate

Teacher: What was to have?
Student: Avere.
Teacher: Avere. And I have?
Student: Ho.
Teacher: Ho. Just ho. And you have?
Student: Hai.
Teacher: Hai. And he or she or it has?
Student: Ha.
Teacher: Ha. They have?
Student: Hanno.
Teacher: Hanno. HANNO. And we have?
Student: Abbiamo.
Teacher: Abbiamo. So both with hanno and abbiamo we have a double consonant as well. Hanno,abbiamo. What was to be?
Student: Essere.
Teacher: I am or they are?
Student: Sono.
Teacher: Sono. You are?
Student: Sei.
Teacher: Sei. It is, he is, she is?
Student: È.
Teacher: È. We are?
Student: Siamo.
Teacher: Siamo. Good. They have understood.
Student: Hanno capito.
Teacher: Hanno capito. They have come.
Student: Sono venuti.
Teacher: Sono venuti. Good. So we need to match venuto now because we are using to be, sono, we haveto match it to who has come, so this is going to be sono venuti for masculine or mixed groups, orfor female groups?
Student: Sono venute. 
Teacher: Sono venute. So we’ve seen two ways of going into the past. We have avere with most verbs,and essere with some verbs with particular meanings like those verbs of movement, for example.There’s also a structural situation that say, well we must use essere to build the past too. What wasto prepare?
Student: Preparare.
Teacher: Preparare. And how would you say we have prepared it?
Student: Lo abbiamo preparato.
Teacher: Lo abbiamo preparato. And with the contraction?
Student: L’abbiamo preparato.
Teacher: Very good. L’abbiamo preparato. So if you say we have prepared it, we use to have, abbiamo.But if we say for example, we have prepared ourselves, when we talk about doing something tooneself then necessarily we use essere to build the past. So if we say for example, we have preparedourselves, what is the word for us or ourselves?
Student: Ci.
Teacher: Ci. So if we say we have prepared ourselves, we will use to be.
Student: Ci siamo preparati.
Teacher: Good. Ci siamo preparati. So we have prepared it – l’abbiamo preparato. We have preparedourselves, we have got ready, there because it's self – oneself, yourself, myself, ourselves – then weuse essere, to be, to go into the past. Ci siamo preparati or preparate, if we are females. So thiswe can call it a structural situation where we should use to be to build the past. How would you sayI have prepared myself?
Student: Mi sono preparata.
Teacher: Good. Mi sono preparata, or mi sono preparato. I have prepared it.
Student: Lo preparato.
Teacher: Very good. Lo preparato. And I am ready, how would you say I am ready, I am prepared?
Student: Sono preparata.
Teacher: Sono preparata. So that's the only difference between I am ready, sono preparata, or sonopreparato in my case, and I have prepared myself, mi sono preparata/preparato. What was it toorganise?
Student: Organizzare.
Teacher: Organizzare. Have you organised the party? The party in Italian is la festa, like festival,festivale, festival, festa. La Festa is the party. So have you organised the party?
Student: Hai organizzato la festa.
Teacher: Hai organizzato la festa. Have you organised it, and you mean the party?
Student: L’hai organizzata? 
Teacher: Very good. L’hai organizzata? Have you organised yourself? Have you got organised, have youorganised yourself?
Student: Ti sei organizzato.
Teacher: Good. We'd have ti sei organizzato to a male, and a female?
Student: Ti sei organizzata.
Teacher: Very good. So there because it's yourself we go back to essere. And so ti sei organizzato, haveyou organised yourself, have you got organised, and what if you wanted just to ask ‘are youorganised’?
Student: Sei organizzato.
Teacher: Sei organizzato or Sei organizzata. So these two structures look very very similar: ‘ti seiorganizzato’, ‘sei organizzato’. But two very different things are happening. We have ti seiorganizzato which is like have you organised yourself, have you got ready. And then just seiorganizzato, are you organised. To have fun, to amuse, to entertain is divertire, divertire.
Student: Divertire.
Teacher: Like to divert, when you enjoy yourself you divert yourself. So if you say I'm having fun, yousay I divert myself, I amuse myself. So how would that be from divertire?
Student: Mi divertireo… Mi diverto.
Teacher: Mi diverto. I divert myself, I have fun. Mi diverto. And that doesn't necessarily literally mean Iamuse myself, it's just the way we say I'm having fun, I divert myself. And we have fun, we arehaving fun?
Student: Ci divertiamo.
Teacher: Ci divertiamo. Or if we use the word for we, noi ci divertiamo. If you want to say I had fun, Ihave amused myself, then again we are using self, myself, so we don't say I have amused myself,but I am amused myself. So how would that be?
Student: Mi sono divertuto, or divertita.
Teacher: -uto is for -ere verbs, so before we change divertire, we need to look back make a quick check,‘okay what do I have here: -are, -ere, -ire’
Student: -ire, divertito. Mi sono divertita.
Teacher: Good. Mi sono divertita for feminine, or for masculine mi sono divertito. We had fun, we hadfun, we enjoyed ourselves?
Student: Ci siamo divertiti.
Teacher: Good. Ci siamo divertiti. And if we are females?
Student: Ci siamo divertite.
Teacher: Ci siamo divertite. Did you have fun, did you enjoy yourself?
Student: Ti sei divertito? 
Teacher: Ti sei divertito? Ti sei divertita? You are fun, you are funny is sei divertente. So we don'talways have the same version giving us an adjective. Here the adjective fun is an -ente adjective,divertente, you are fun. How would you say we are fun?
Student: Siamo divertente.
Teacher: Good. Siamo divertente. So when you find yourself talking about myself, yourself, themselvesin this past, you will use essere again. Which also means that you will hear this essere past muchmore than you might have expected to. For example if you say to somebody ‘have you seen me’,how is it?
Student: Mi hai visto?
Teacher: Mi hai visto? Have you seen yourself?
Student: Ti sei visto.
Teacher: And there it changes. Ti sei visto, or a female, ti sei vista. This matching isn’t optional, ofcourse, we have to be there, we must match it. Ti sei visto. Ti sei vista. What is to buy?
Student: Comprare.
Teacher: Comprare. Where have you bought it?
Student: Dove l’hai comprato.
Teacher: Good. Dove l’hai comprato. Where have you bought yourself it, where have you bought it foryourself? Where did you buy yourself it?
Student: Dove te lo sei comprato.
Teacher: Very good. Dove te lo sei comprato. So there because we said bought for yourself we includedthe te, we go back to essere. Dove te lo sei comprato, and comprato is matching with lo. Dove telo sei comprato.